f treasure
  for recompense of our travails, which was generally expected at
  our coming forth of England: wherein we answer:--

 'That it is well known how both we and the soldiers are entered
  into this action as voluntary men, without any impress or gage
  from her Majesty or anybody else. And forasmuch as we have
  hitherto discharged the parts of honest men, so that now by the
  great blessing and favour of our good God there have been taken
  three such notable towns, wherein by the estimation of all men
  would have been found some very great treasures, knowing that
  Santiago was the chief city of all the islands and traffics
  thereabouts, St. Domingo the chief city of Hispaniola, and the
  head government not only of that island, but also of Cuba, and of
  all the islands about it, as also of such inhabitations of the
  firm land, as were next unto it, and a place that is both
  magnificently built and entertaineth great trades of merchandise;
  and now lastly the city of Carthagena, which cannot be denied to
  be one of the chief places of most especial importance to the
  Spaniard of all the cities which be on this side of the West
  India: we do therefore consider, that since all these cities, with
  their goods and prisoners taken in them, and the ransoms of the
  said cities, being all put together, are found far short to
  satisfy that expectation which by the generality of the
  enterprisers was first conceived; and being further advised of
  the slenderness of our strength, whereunto we be now reduced, as
  well in respect of the small number of able bodies, as also not a
  little in regard of the slack disposition of the greater part of
  those which remain, very many of the better minds and men being
  either consumed by death or weakened by sickness and hurts; and
  lastly, since that as yet there is not laid down to our knowledge
  any such enterprise as may seem convenient to be undertaken with
  such few as we are presently able to make, and withal of such
  certain likelihood, as with God's good success which it may please
  him to bestow upon us, the same may promise to yield us any
  sufficient contentment: we do therefore conclude hereupon, that it
  is better to hold sure as we may the honour already gotten, and
  with the same to return towards our gracious sovereign and
  country, from whence, if it shall please her Majesty to set us
  forth again with her orderly means and entertainment, we are most
  ready and willing to go through with anything that the uttermost
  of our strength and endeavour shall be able to reach unto. But
  therewithal we do advise and protest that it is far from our
  thoughts, either to refuse, or so much as to seem to be weary of
  anything which for the present shall be further required or
  directed to be done by us from our General.'

  THE THIRD and last point is concerning the ransom of this city of
  Carthagena, for the which, before it was touched with any fire,
  there was made an offer of some 27,000 or 28,000 pounds
  sterling:--

 'Thus much we utter herein as our opinions, agreeing, so it be done
  in good sort, to accept this offer aforesaid, rather than to break
  off by standing still upon our demands of 100,000 pounds; which
  seems a matter impossible to be performed for the present by them.
  And to say truth, we may now with much honour and reputation
  better be satisfied with that sum offered by them at the first, if
  they will now be contented to give it, than we might at that time
  with a great deal more; inasmuch as we have taken our full
  pleasure, both in the uttermost sacking and spoiling of all their
  household goods and merchandise, as also in that we have consumed
  and ruined a great part of their town with fire. And thus much
  further is considered herein by us; that as there be in the voyage
  a great many poor men, who have willingly adventured their lives
  and travails, and divers amongst them having spent their apparel
  and such other little provisions as their small means might have
  given them leave to prepare, which being done upon such good and
  allowable intention as this action hath always carried with it
  (meaning, against the Spaniard, our greatest and most dangerous
  enemy), so surely we cannot but have an inward regard, so far as
  may lie in us, to help them in all good sort towards the
  satisfaction of this their expectation; and by procuring them some
  little benefit to encourage them, and to nourish this ready and
  willing disposition of theirs, both in them and in others by their
  example, against any other time of like occasion. But because it
  may be supposed that herein we forget not the private benefit of
  ourselves, and are thereby the rather moved to incline ourselves
  to this composition, we do therefore think good for the clearing
  ourselves of all such suspicion, to declare hereby, that what part
  or portion soever it be of this ransom or composition for
  Carthagena which should come unto us, we do freely give and bestow
  the same wholly upon the poor men who have remained with us in the
  voyage (meaning as well the sailor as the soldier), wishing with
  all our hearts it were such or so much as might see a sufficient
  reward for their painful endeavour. And for the firm confirmation
  thereof, we have thought meet to subsign these presents with our
  own hands in the place and time aforesaid.

 'Captain Christopher Charlie, Lieutenant-General; Captain Goring,
  Captain Sampson, Captain Powell, etc.'

But while we were yet there, it happened one day that our watch called
the sentinel, upon the church-steeple, had discovered in the sea a
couple of small barks or boats, making in with the harbour of
Carthagena. Whereupon Captain Moon and Captain Varney, with John
Grant, the master of the Tiger, and some other seamen, embarked
themselves in a couple of small pinnaces, to take them before they
should come nigh the shore, at the mouth of the harbour, lest by some
straggling Spaniards from the land, they might be warned by signs from
coming in. Which fell out accordingly, notwithstanding all the
diligence that our men could use: for the Spanish boats, upon the
sight of our pinnaces coming towards them, ran themselves ashore, and
so their men presently hid themselves in bushes hard by the sea-side,
amongst some others that had called them by signs thither. Our men
presently without any due regard had to the quality of the place, and
seeing no man of the Spaniards to shew themselves, boarded the Spanish
barks or boats, and so standing all open in them, were suddenly shot
at by a troop of Spaniards out of the bushes; by which volley of shot
there were slain Captain Varney, which died presently, and Captain
Moon, who died some few days after, besides some four or five others
that were hurt: and so our folks returned without their purpose, not
having any sufficient number of soldiers with them to fight on shore.
For those men they carried were all mariners to row, few of them
armed, because they made account with their ordnance to have taken the
barks well enough at sea; which they might full easily have done,
without any loss at all, if they had come in time to the harbour
mouth, before the Spaniards' boats had gotten so near the shore.

During our abode in this place, as also at St. Domingo, there passed
divers courtesies between us and the Spaniards, as feasting, and using
them with all kindness and favour; so as amongst others there came to
see the General the governor of Carthagena, with the bishop of the
same, and divers other gentlemen of the better sort. This town of
Carthagena we touched in the out parts, and consumed much with fire,
as we had done St. Domingo, upon discontentments, and for want of
agreeing with us in their first treaties touching their ransom; which
at the last was concluded between us should be 110,000 ducats for that
which was yet standing, the ducat valued at five shillings sixpence
sterling.

This town, though not half so big as St. Domingo, gives, as you see, a
far greater ransom, being in very deed of far more importance, by
reason of the excellency of the harbour, and the situation thereof to
serve the trade of Nombre de Dios and other places, and is inhabited
with far more richer merchants. The other is chiefly inhabited with
lawyers and brave gentlemen, being the chief or highest appeal of
their suits in law of all the islands about it and of the mainland
coast next unto it. And it is of no such account as Carthagena, for
these and some like reasons which I could give you, over long to be
now written.

The warning which this town received of our coming towards them from
St. Domingo, by the space of 20 days before our arrival here, was
cause that they had both fortified and every way prepared for their
best defence. As also that they had carried and conveyed away all
their treasure and principal substance.

The ransom of 110,000 ducats thus concluded on, as is aforesaid, the
same being written, and expressing for nothing more than the town of
Carthagena, upon the payment of the said ransom we left the said town
and drew some part of our soldiers into the priory or abbey, standing
a quarter of an English mile below the town upon the harbour water-
side, the same being walled with a wall of stone; which we told the
Spaniards was yet ours, and not redeemed by their composition.
Whereupon they, finding the defect of their contract, were contented
to enter into another ransom for all places, but specially for the
said house, as also the blockhouse or castle, which is upon the mouth
of the inner harbour. And when we asked as much for the one as for the
other, they yielded to give a thousand crowns for the abbey, leaving
us to take our pleasure upon the blockhouse, which they said they were
not able to ransom, having stretched themselves to the uttermost of
their powers; and therefore the said blockhouse was by us undermined,
and so with gunpowder blown up in pieces. While this latter contract
was in making, our whole fleet of ships fell down towards the harbour-
mouth, where they anchored the third time and employed their men in
fetching of fresh water aboard the ships for our voyage homewards,
which water was had in a great well that is in the island by the
harbour-mouth. Which island is a very pleasant place as hath been
seen, having in it many sorts of goodly and very pleasant fruits, as
the orange-trees and others, being set orderly in walks of great
length together. Insomuch as the whole island, being some two or three
miles about, is cast into grounds of gardening and orchards.

After six weeks' abode in this place, we put to sea the last of March;
where, after two or three days, a great Ship which we had taken at St.
Domingo, and thereupon was called The New Year's Gift, fell into a
great leak, being laden with ordnance, hides, and other spoils, and in
the night she lost the company of our fleet. Which being missed the
next morning by the General, he cast about with the whole fleet,
fearing some great mischance to be happened unto her, as in very deed
it so fell out; for her leak was so great that her men were all tired
with pumping. But at the last, having found her, and the bark Talbot
in her company, which stayed by great hap with her, they were ready to
take their men out of her for the saving of them. And so the General,
being fully advertised of their great extremity, made sail directly
back again to Carthagena with the whole fleet; where, having staid
eight or ten days more about the unlading of this ship and the
bestowing thereof and her men into other ships, we departed once again
to sea, directing our course toward the Cape St. Anthony, being the
westermost part of Cuba, where we arrived the 27th of April. But
because fresh water could not presently be found, we weighed anchor
and departed, thinking in few days to recover the Matanzas, a place to
the eastward of Havana.

After we had sailed some fourteen days we were brought to Cape St.
Anthony again through lack of favourable wind; but then our scarcity
was grown such as need make us look a little better for water, which
we found in sufficient quantity, being indeed, as I judge, none other
than rain-water newly fallen and gathered up by making pits in a plot
of marish ground some three hundred paces from the seaside.

I do wrong if I should forget the good example of the General at this
place, who, to encourage others, and to hasten the getting of fresh
water aboard the ships, took no less pain himself than the meanest; as
also at St. Domingo, Carthagena, and all other places, having always
so vigilant a care and foresight in the good ordering of his fleet,
accompanying them, as it is said, with such wonderful travail of body,
as doubtless had he been the meanest person, as he was the chiefest,
he had yet deserved the first place of honour; and no less happy do we
account him for being associated with Master Carlile, his Lieutenant-
General, by whose experience, prudent counsel, and gallant performance
he achieved so many and happy enterprises of the war, by whom also he
was very greatly assisted in setting down the needful orders, laws,
and course of justice, and the due administration of the same upon all
occasions.

After three days spent in watering our ships, we departed now the
second time from this Cape of St. Anthony the 13th of May. And
proceeding about the Cape of Florida, we never touched anywhere; but
coasting alongst Florida, and keeping the shore still in sight, the
28th of May, early in the morning, we descried on the shore a place
built like a beacon, which was indeed a scaffold upon four long masts
raised on end for men to discover to the seaward, being in the
latitude of thirty degrees, or very near thereunto. Our pinnaces
manned and coming to the shore, we marched up alongst the river-side
to see what place the enemy held there; for none amongst us had any
knowledge thereof at all.

Here the General took occasion to march with the companies himself in
person, the Lieutenant-General having the vant-guard; and, going a
mile up, or somewhat more, by the river-side, we might discern on the
other side of the river over against us a fort which newly had been
built by the Spaniards; and some mile, or thereabout, above the fort
was a little town or village without walls, built of wooden houses, as
the plot doth plainly shew. We forthwith prepared to have ordnance for
the battery; and one piece was a little before the evening planted,
and the first shot being made by the Lieutenant-General himself at
their ensign, strake through the ensign, as we afterwards understood
by a Frenchman which came unto us from them. One shot more was then
made, which struck the foot of the fort wall, which was all massive
timber of great trees like masts. The Lieutenant-General was
determined to pass the river this night with four companies, and there
to lodge himself entrenched as near the fort as that he might play
with his muskets and smallest shot upon any that should appear, and so
afterwards to bring and plant the battery with him; but the help of
mariners for that sudden to make trenches could not be had, which was
the cause that this determination was remitted until the next night.

In the night the Lieutenant-General took a little rowing skiff and
half a dozen well armed, as Captain Morgan and Captain Sampson, with
some others, beside the rowers, and went to view what guard the enemy
kept, as also to take knowledge of the ground. And albeit he went as
covertly as might be, yet the enemy, taking the alarm, grew fearful
that the whole force was approaching to the assault, and therefore
with all speed abandoned the place after the shooting of some of their
pieces. They thus gone, and he being returned unto us again, but
nothing knowing of their flight from their fort, forthwith came a
Frenchman, [Nicolas Borgoignon] being a fifer (who had been prisoner
with them) in a little boat, playing on his fife the tune of the
Prince of Orange his song. And being called unto by the guard, he told
them before he put foot out of the boat what he was himself, and how
the Spaniards were gone from the fort; offering either to remain in
hands there, or else to return to the place with them that would go.
[The 'Prince of Orange's Song' was a popular ditty in praise of
William Prince of Orange (assassinated 1584), the leader of the Dutch
Protestant insurgents.]

Upon this intelligence the General, the Lieutenant-General, with some
of the captains in one skiff and the Vice-Admiral with some others in
his skiff, and two or three pinnaces furnished of soldiers with them,
put presently over towards the fort, giving order for the rest of the
pinnaces to follow. And in our approach some of the enemy, bolder than
the rest, having stayed behind their company, shot off two pieces of
ordnance at us; but on shore we went, and entered the place without
finding any man there.

When the day appeared, we found it built all of timber, the walls
being none other than whole masts or bodies of trees set upright and
close together in manner of a pale, without any ditch as yet made, but
wholly intended with some more time. For they had not as yet finished
all their work, having begun the same some three or four months
before; so as, to say the truth, they had no reason to keep it, being
subject both to fire and easy assault.

The platform whereon the ordnance lay was whole bodies of long pine-
trees, whereof there is great plenty, laid across one on another and
some little earth amongst. There were in it thirteen or fourteen great
pieces of brass ordnance and a chest unbroken up, having in it the
value of some two thousand pounds sterling, by estimation, of the
king's treasure, to pay the soldiers of that place, who were a hundred
and fifty men.

The fort thus won, which they called St. John's Fort, and the day
opened, we assayed to go to the town, but could not by reason of some
rivers and broken ground which was between the two places. And
therefore being enforced to embark again into our pinnaces, we went
thither upon the great main river, which is called, as also the town,
by the name of St. Augustine. At our approaching to land, there were
some that began to shew themselves, and to bestow some few shot upon
us, but presently withdrew themselves. And in their running thus away,
the Sergeant-Major finding one of their horses ready saddled and
bridled, took the same to follow the chase; and so overgoing all his
company, was by one laid behind a bush shot through the head; and
falling down therewith, was by the same and two or three more, stabbed
in three or four places of his body with swords and daggers, before
any could come near to his rescue. His death was much lamented, being
in very deed an honest wise gentleman, and soldier of good experience,
and of as great courage as any man might be.

In this place called St. Augustine we understood the king did keep, as
is before said, 150 soldiers, and at another place some dozen leagues
beyond to the northwards, called St. Helena, he did there likewise
keep 150 more, serving there for no other purpose than to keep all
other nations from inhabiting any part of all that coast; the
government whereof was committed to one Pedro Melendez, marquis,
nephew to that Melendez the Admiral, who had overthrown Master John
Hawkins in the Bay of Mexico some 17 or 18 years ago. This governor
had charge of both places, but was at this time in this place, and one
of the first that left the same.

Here it was resolved in full assembly of captains, to undertake the
enterprise of St. Helena, and from thence to seek out the inhabitation
of our English countrymen in Virginia, distant from thence some six
degrees northward. When we came thwart of St. Helena, the shoals
appearing dangerous, and we having no pilot to undertake the entry, it
was thought meetest to go hence alongst. For the Admiral had been the
same night in four fathom and a half, three leagues from the shore;
and yet we understood, by the help of a known pilot, there may and do
go in ships of greater burden and draught than any we had in our
fleet. We passed thus along the coast hard aboard the shore, which is
shallow for a league or two from the shore, and the same is low and
broken land for the most part. The ninth of June upon sight of one
special great fire (which are very ordinary all alongst this coast,
even from the Cape of Florida hither) the General sent his skiff to
the shore, where they found some of our English countrymen that had
been sent thither the year before by Sir Walter Raleigh, and brought
them aboard; by whose direction we proceeded along to the place which
they make their port. But some of our ships being of great draught,
unable to enter, anchored without the harbour in a wild road at sea,
about two miles from shore. From whence the General wrote letters to
Master Ralph Lane, being governor of those English in Virginia, and
then at his fort about six leagues from the road in an island which
they called Roanoac; wherein especially he shewed how ready he was to
supply his necessities and wants, which he understood of by those he
had first talked withal.

The morrow after, Master Lane himself and some of his company coming
unto him, with the consent of his captains he gave them the choice of
two offers, that is to say: either he would leave a ship, a pinnace,
and certain boats with sufficient masters and mariners, together
furnished with a month's victual, to stay and make further discovery
of the country and coasts, and so much victual likewise as might be
sufficient for the bringing of them all (being an hundred and three
persons) into England, if they thought good after such time, with any
other thing they would desire, and that he might be able to spare: or
else, if they thought they had made sufficient discovery already, and
did desire to return into England, he would give them passage. But
they, as it seemed, being desirous to stay, accepted very thankfully
and with great gladness that which was offered first. Whereupon the
ship being appointed and received into charge by some of their own
company sent into her by Master Lane, before they had received from
the rest of the fleet the provision appointed them, there arose a
great storm (which they said was extraordinary and very strange) that
lasted three days together, and put all our fleet in great danger to
be driven from their anchoring upon the coast; for we brake many
cables, and lost many anchors; and some of our fleet which had lost
all, of which number was the ship appointed for Master Lane and his
company, were driven to put to sea in great danger, in avoiding the
coast, and could never see us again until we met in England. Many also
of our small pinnaces and boats were lost in this storm.

Notwithstanding, after all this, the General offered them, with
consent of his captains, another ship with some provisions, although
not such a one for their turns as might have been spared them before,
this being unable to be brought into their harbour: or else, if they
would, to give them passage into England, although he knew he should
perform it with greater difficulty than he might have done before. But
Master Lane, with those of the chiefest of his company which he had
then with him, considering what should be best for them to do, made
request unto the General under their hands, that they might have
passage for England: the which being granted, and the rest sent for
out of the country and shipped, we departed from that coast the 18th
of June. And so, God be thanked, both they and we in good safety
arrived at Portsmouth the 28th of July, 1586, to the great glory of
God, and to no small honour to our Prince, our country, and ourselves.
The total value of that which was got in this voyage is esteemed at
three score thousand pounds, whereof the companies which have
travailed in the voyage were to have twenty thousand pounds, the
adventurers the other forty. Of which twenty thousand pounds (as I can
judge) will redound some six pounds to the single share. We lost some
750 men in the voyage; above three parts of them only by sickness. The
men of name that died and were slain in this voyage, which I can
presently call to remembrance, are these:--Captain Powell, Captain
Varney, Captain Moon, Captain Fortescue, Captain Biggs, Captain Cecil,
Captain Hannam, Captain Greenfield; Thomas Tucker, a lieutenant;
Alexander Starkey, a lieutenant; Master Escot, a lieutenant; Master
Waterhouse, a lieutenant; Master George Candish, Master Nicholas
Winter, Master Alexander Carlile, Master Robert Alexander, Master
Scroope, Master James Dyer, Master Peter Duke. With some other, whom
for haste I cannot suddenly think on.

The ordnance gotten of all sorts, brass and iron, were about two
hundred and forty pieces, whereof the two hundred and some more were
brass, and were thus found and gotten:--At Santiago some two or three
and fifty pieces. In St. Domingo about four score, whereof was very
much great ordnance, as whole cannon, demi-cannon, culverins, and such
like. In Carthagena some sixty and three pieces, and good store
likewise of the greater sort. In the Fort of St. Augustine were
fourteen pieces. The rest was iron ordnance, of which the most part
was gotten at St. Domingo, the rest at Carthagena.










This etext was prepared by KENNETH DAVID COOPER <cooper.kd@bigpond.com>





DR THORNE

by Anthony Trollope




CONTENTS

I           THE GRESHAMS OF GRESHAMSBURY
II          LONG, LONG AGO
III         DR THORNE
IV          LESSONS FROM COURCY CASTLE
V           FRANK GRESHAM'S FIRST SPEECH
VI          FRANK GRESHAM'S EARLY LOVES
VII         THE DOCTOR'S GARDEN
VIII        MATRIMONIAL PROSPECTS
IX          SIR ROGER SCATCHERD
X           SIR ROGER'S WILL
XI          THE DOCTOR DRINKS HIS TEA
XII         WHEN GREEK MEETS GREEK, THEN COMES THE TUG OF WAR
XIII        THE TWO UNCLES
XIV         SENTENCE OF EXILE
XV          COURCY
XVII        MISS DUNSTABLE
XVIII       THE RIVALS
XIX         THE DUKE OF OMNIUM
XX          THE PROPOSAL
XXI         MR MOFFAT FALLS INTO TROUBLE
XXII        SIR ROGER IS UNSEATED
XXIII       RETROSPECTIVE
XXIV        LOUIS SCATCHERD
XXV         SIR ROGER DIES
XXVI        WAR
XXVII       MISS THORNE GOES ON A VISIT
XXVIII      THE DOCTOR HEARS SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE
XXIX        THE DONKEY RIDE
XXX         POST PRANDIAL
XXXI        THE SMALL END OF THE WEDGE
XXXII       MR ORIEL
XXXIII      A MORNING VISIT
XXXIV       A BAROUCHE AND FOUR ARRIVES AT GRESHAMSBURY
XXXV        SIR LOUIS GOES OUT TO DINNER
XXXVI       WILL HE COME AGAIN?
XXXVII      SIR LOUIS LEAVES GRESHAMSBURY
XXXVIII     DE COURCY PRECEPTS AND DE COURCY PRACTICE
XXXIX       WHAT THE WORLD SAYS ABOUT BLOOD
XL          THE TWO DOCTORS CHANGE PATIENTS
XLI         DOCTOR THORNE WON'T INTERFERE
XLII        WHAT CAN YOU GIVE IN RETURN?
XLIII       THE RACE OF SCATCHERD BECOMES EXTINCT
XLIV        SATURDAY EVENING AND SUNDAY MORNING
XLV         LAW BUSINESS IN LONDON
XLVI        OUR PET FOX FINDS A TAIL
XLVII       HOW THE BRIDE WAS RECEIVED, AND WHO WERE ASKED TO THE WEDDING




DOCTOR THORNE



CHAPTER I

THE GRESHAMS OF GRESHAMSBURY

Before the reader is introduced to the modest country medical 
practitioner who is to be the chief personage of the following tale, it
will be well that he should be made acquainted with some particulars as
to the locality in which, and the neighbours among whom, our doctor
followed his profession.

There is a county in the west of England not so full of life, indeed,
nor so widely spoken of as some of its manufacturing leviathan brethren
in the north, but which is, nevertheless, very dear to those who know
it well.  Its green pastures, its waving wheat, its deep and shady
and--let us add--dirty lanes, its paths and stiles, its tawny-coloured,
well-built rural churches, its avenues of beeches, and frequent Tudor 
mansions, its constant county hunt, its social graces, and the general
air of clanship which pervades it, has made it to its own inhabitants a
favoured land of Goshen.  It is purely agricultural; agricultural in
its produce, agricultural in its poor, and agricultural in its
pleasures.  There are towns in it, of course; depots from whence are
brought seeds and groceries, ribbons and fire-shovels; in which markets
are held and county balls are carried on; which return members to 
Parliament, generally--in spite of Reform Bills, past, present, and
coming--in accordance with the dictates of some neighbouring land
magnate; from whence emanate the country postmen, and where is located
the supply of post-horses necessary for county visitings.  But these
towns add nothing to the importance of the county; dull, all but
death-like single streets.  Each possesses two pumps, three hotels, ten
shops, fifteen beer-houses, a beadle, and a market-place.

Indeed, the town population of the county reckons for nothing when the
importance of the county is discussed, with the exception, as before
said, of the assize town, which is also a cathedral city.  Herein a
clerical aristocracy, which is certainly not without its due weight.  A
resident bishop, a resident dean, an archdeacon, three or four resident
prebendaries, and all their numerous chaplains, vicars, and 
ecclesiastical satellites, do make up a society sufficiently powerful
to be counted as something by the county squirearchy. In other respects
the greatness of Barsetshire depends wholly on the landed powers.

Barsetshire, however, is not now so essentially one whole as it was
before the Reform Bill divided it.  There is in these days an East
Barsetshire, and there is a West Barsetshire; and people conversant
with Barsetshire doings declare that they can already decipher some
difference of feeling, some division of interests.  The eastern moiety
of the county is more purely Conservative than the western; there is,
or was, a taint of Peelism in the latter; and then, too, the residence
of two such great Whig magnates as the Duke of Omnium and the Earl De
Courcy in that locality in some degree overshadows and renders less
influential the gentlemen who live near them.

It is to East Barsetshire that we are called.  When the division above
spoken of was first contemplated, in those stormy days in which gallant
men were still combatting reform ministers, if not with hope, still
with spirit, the battle was fought by none more bravely than by John
Newbold Gresham of Greshamsbury, the member for Barsetshire.  Fate,
however, and the Duke of Wellington were adverse, and in the following 
Parliament John Newbold Gresham was only member for East Barsetshire.

Whether or not it was true, as stated at the time, that the aspect of
the men with whom he was called on to associate at St Stephen's broke
his heart, it is not for us now to inquire.  It is certainly true that
he did not live to see the first year of the reformed Parliament
brought to a close. 
 
The then Mr Gresham was not an old man at the time of his death, and
his eldest son, Francie Newbold Gresham, was a very young man; but,
notwithstanding his youth, and notwithstanding other grounds of
objection which stood in the way of such preferment, and which, it must
be explained, he was chosen in his father's place.  The father's
services had been too recent, too well appreciated, too thoroughly in 
unison with the feelings of those around him to allow of any other
choice; and in this way young Frank Gresham found himself member for
East Barsetshire, although the very men who elected him knew that they
had but slender ground for trusting him with their suffrages.

Frank Gresham, though then only twenty four years of age, was a married
man, and a father.  He had already chosen a wife, and by his choice had
given much ground of distrust to the men of East Barsetshire.  He had
married no other than Lady Arabella De Courcy, the sister of the great
Whig earl who lived at Courcy Castle in the west; that earl who not
only had voted for the Reform Bill, but had been infamously active in
bringing over other young peers so to vote, and whose name therefore
stank in the nostrils of the staunch Tory squires of the county.

Not only had Frank Gresham so wedded, but having thus improperly and
unpatriotically chosen a wife, he had added to his sins by becoming
recklessly intimate with his wife's relations.  It is true that he
still called himself a Tory, belonged to the club of which his father
had been one of the most honoured members, and in the days of the great
battle got his head broken in a row, on the right side; but, 
nevertheless, it was felt by the good men, true and blue, of East
Barsetshire, that a constant sojourner at Courcy Castle could not be
regarded as a consistent Tory.  When, however, his father died, that
broken head served him in good stead: his sufferings in the cause were
made the most of; these, in unison with his father's merits, turned the
scale, and it was accordingly decided, at a meeting held at the George
and Dragon, at Barchester, that Frank Gresham should fill his father's
shoes.

But Frank Gresham could not fill his father's shoes; they were too big
for him.  He did become member for East Barsetshire, but he was such a
member--so lukewarm, so indifferent, so prone to associate with the
enemies of the good cause, so little willing to fight the good fight,
that he soon disgusted those who most dearly loved the memory of the
old squire.

De Courcy Castle in those days had great allurements for a young man,
and all those allurements were made the most of to win over young
Gresham.  His wife, who was a year or two older than himself, was a
fashionable woman, with thorough Whig tastes and aspirations, such as
became the daughter of a great Whig earl; she cared for politics, or
thought that she cared for them, more than her husband did; for a month
or two previous to her engagement she had been attached to the Court,
and had been made to believe that much of the policy of England's
rulers depended on the political intrigues of England's women.  She was
one who would fain be doing something if she only knew how, and the
first important attempt she made was to turn her respectable young Tory
husband into a second-rate Whig bantling.  As this lady's character
will, it is hoped, show itself in the following pages, we need not now
describe it more closely.

It is not a bad thing to be son-in-law to a potent earl, member of
Parliament for a county, and a possessor of a fine old English seat,
and a fine old English fortune.  As a very young man, Frank Gresham
found the life to which he was thus introduced agreeable enough.  He
consoled himself as best he might for the blue looks with which he was
greeted by his own party, and took his revenge by consorting more
thoroughly than ever with his political adversaries.  Foolishly, like a
foolish moth, he flew to the bright light, and, like the moths, of
course he burnt his wings.  Early in 1833 he had become a member of
Parliament, and in the autumn of 1834 the dissolution came.  Young
members of three had four-and-twenty do not think much of dissolutions,
forget the fancies of their constituents, and are too proud of the
present to calculate much as to the future.  So it was with Mr Gresham.
His father had been member for Barsetshire all his life, and he looked
forward to similar prosperity as though it was part of his inheritance;
but he failed to take any of the steps which had secured his father's
seat.

In the autumn of 1834 the dissolution came, and Frank Gresham, with his
honourable lady wife and all the De Courcys at his back, found that he
had mortally offended the county. 

To his great disgust another candidate was brought forward as a fellow
to his late colleague, and though he manfully fought the battle, and
spent ten thousand pounds in the contest, he could not recover his
position.  A high Tory, with a great Whig interest to back him, is
never a popular person in England.  No one can trust him, though there
may be those who are willing to place him, untrusted, in high 
positions.  Such was the case with Mr Gresham.  There were many who
were willing, for family considerations, to keep him in Parliament; but
no one thought that he was fit to be there.  The consequences were,
that a bitter and expensive contest ensued.  Frank Gresham, when
twitted with being a Whig, foreswore the De Courcy family; and then,
when ridiculed as having been thrown over by the Tories, foreswore his
father's old friends.  So between the two stools he fell to the ground,
and, as a politician, he never again rose to his feet.

He never again rose to his feet; but twice again he made violent
efforts to do so.  Elections in East Barsetshire, from various causes,
came quick upon each other in those days, and before he was
eight-and-twenty years of age Mr Gresham had three times contested the
county and been three times beaten. To speak the truth of him, his own
spirit would have been satisfied with the loss of the first ten
thousand pounds; but Lady Arabella was made of higher mettle.  She had 
married a man with a fine place and a fine fortune; but she had
nevertheless married a commoner and had in so far derogated from her
high birth.  She felt that her husband should be by rights a member of
the House of Lords; but, if not, that it was at least essential that he
should have a seat in the lower chamber.  She would be degrees sink
into nothing if she allowed herself to sit down, the mere wife of a
county squire.

Thus instigated, Mr Gresham repeated the useless contest three times,
and repeated it each time at a serious cost.  He lost his money, Lady
Arabella lost her temper, and things at Greshamsbury went on by no
means as prosperously as they had done in the days of the old squire.

In the first twelve years of their marriage, children came fast into
the nursery at Greshamsbury.  The first that was born was a boy; and in
those happy halcyon days, when the old squire was still alive, great
was the joy at the birth of an heir to Greshamsbury; bonfires gleamed
through the country-side, oxen were roasted whole, and the customary 
paraphernalia of joy, usual to rich Britons on such occasions were gone
through with wondrous eclat.  But when the tenth baby, and the ninth
little girl, was brought into the world, the outward show of joy was
not so great.

Then other troubles came.  Some of these little girls were sickly, some
very sickly.  Lady Arabella had her faults, and they were such as were
extremely detrimental to her husband's happiness and her own; but that
of being an indifferent mother was not among them.  She had worried her
husband daily for years because he was not in Parliament, she had
worried him because he would not furnish his house in Portman Square, 
she had worried him because he objected to have more people carried
every winter at Greshamsbury Park than the house would hold; but now
she changed her tune and worried him because Selina coughed, because
Helena was hectic, because poor Sophy's spine was weak, and Matilda's
appetite was gone.

Worrying from such causes was pardonable it will be said.  So it was;
but the manner was hardly pardonable.  Selina's cough was certainly not
fairly attributable to the old-fashioned furniture in Portman Square;
nor would Sophy's spine have been materially benefited by her father
having a seat in Parliament; and yet, to have heard Lady Arabella
discussing those matters in family conclave, one would have thought
that she would have expected such results.

As it was, her poor weak darlings were carried about from London to
Brighton, from Brighton to some German baths, from the German baths
back to Torquay, and thence--as regarded the four we have named--to
that bourne from whence no further journey could be made under Lady
Arabella's directions.

The one son and heir to Greshamsbury was named as his father, Francis
Newbold Gresham.  He would have been the hero of our tale had not that
place been pre-occupied by the village doctor.  As it is, those who
please may regard him.  It is he who is to be our favourite young man,
to do the love scenes, to have his trials and his difficulties, and to
win through them or not, as the case may be.  I am too old now to be a 
hard-hearted author, and so it is probable that he may not die of a
broken heart.  Those who don't approve of a middle-aged bachelor
country doctor as a hero, may take the heir to Greshamsbury in his
stead, and call the book, if it so please them, 'The Loves and
Adventures of Francis Newbold Gresham the Younger.'

And Master Frank Gresham was not ill adapted for playing the part of a
hero of this sort.  He did not share his sisters' ill-health, and
though the only boy of the family, he excelled all his sisters in
personal appearance.  The Greshams from time immemorial had been
handsome.  They were broad browed, blue-eyed, fair haired, born with
dimples in their chins, and that pleasant, aristocratic dangerous curl 
of the upper lip which can equally express good humour or scorn.  Young
Frank was every inch a Gresham, and was the darling of his father's
heart.

The De Courcys had never been plain.  There was too much hauteur, too
much pride, we may perhaps even fairly say, too much nobility in their
gait and manners, and even in their faces, to allow of their being
considered plain; but they were not a race nurtured by Venus or
Apollo.  They were tall and thin, with high cheek-bones, high
foreheads, and large, dignified, cold eyes.  The De Courcy girls all
had good hair; and, as they also possessed easy manners and powers of 
talking, they managed to pass in the world for beauties till they were
absorbed in the matrimonial market, and the world at large cared no
longer whether they were beauties or not.  The Misses Gresham were made
in the De Courcy mould, and were not on this account the less dear to
their mother.

The two eldest, Augusta and Beatrice, lived, and were apparently likely
to live.  The four next faded and died one after another--all in the
same sad year--and were laid in the neat, new cemetery at Torquay. Then
came a pair, born at one birth, weak, delicate, frail little flowers,
with dark hair and dark eyes, and thin, long, pale faces, with long, 
bony hands, and long bony feet, whom men looked on as fated to follow
their sisters with quick steps.  Hitherto, however, they had not
followed them, nor had they suffered as their sisters had suffered; and
some people at Greshamsbury attributed this to the fact that a change
had been made in the family medical practitioner. 

Then came the youngest of the flock, she whose birth we have said was
not heralded with loud joy; for when she came into the world, four
others with pale temples, wan, worn cheeks, and skeleton, white arms,
were awaiting permission to leave it.

Such was the family when, in the year 1854, the eldest son came of
age.  He had been educated at Harrow, and was now still at Cambridge;
but, of course, on such a day as this he was at home.  That coming of
age must be a delightful time to a young man born to inherit broad
acres and wide wealth.  Those full-mouthed congratulations; those warm
prayers with which his manhood is welcomed by the grey-haired seniors
of the county; the affectionate, all but motherly caresses of 
neighbouring mothers who have seen him grow up from his cradle, of
mothers who have daughters, perhaps, fair enough, and good enough, and
sweet enough even for him; the soft-spoken, half-bashful, but tender
greetings of the girls, who now, perhaps for the first time, call him
by his stern family name, instructed by instinct rather than precept
that the time has come when the familiar Charles or familiar John must 
by them be laid aside; the 'lucky dogs', and hints of silver spoons
which are poured into his ears as each young compeer slaps his back and
bids him live a thousand years and then never die; the shouting of the
tenantry, the good wishes of the old farmers who come up to wring his
hand, the kisses which he gets from the farmers' wives, and the kisses
which he gives to the farmers' daughters; all these things must make
the twenty-first birthday pleasant enough to a young heir.  To a youth,
however, who feels that he is now liable to arrest, and that he
inherits no other privilege, the pleasure may very possibly not be
quite so keen.

The case with young Frank Gresham may be supposed to much nearer the
former than the latter; but yet the ceremony of his coming of age was
by no means like that which fate had accorded to his father.  Mr
Gresham was not an embarrassed man, and though the world did not know
it, or, at any rate, did not know that he was deeply embarrassed, he
had not the heart to throw open his mansion and receive the county with
a free hand as though all things were going well for him. 

Nothing was going well with him.  Lady Arabella would allow nothing
near him or around him to be well.  Everything with him was now turned
to vexation; he was no longer a joyous, happy man, and the people of
East Barsetshire did not look for gala doings on a grand scale when
young Gresham came of age.

Gala doings, to a certain extent, there were there.  It was in July,
and tables were spread under the oaks for the tenants.  Tables were
spread, and meat and beer, and wine were there, and Frank, as he walked
round and shook his guests by the hand, expressed a hope that their
relations with each other might be long, close, and mutually 
advantageous.

We must say a few words now about the place itself.  Greshamsbury Park
was a fine old Englishman's seat--was and is; but we can assert it more
easily in past tense, as we are speaking of it with reference to a past
time.  We have spoken of Greshamsbury Park; there was a park so called,
but the mansion itself was generally known as Greshamsbury House, and 
did not stand in the park.  We may perhaps best describe it by saying
that the village of Greshamsbury consisted of one long, straggling
street, a mile in length, which in the centre turned sharp round, so
that one half of the street lay directly at right angles to the other. 
In this angle stood Greshamsbury House, and the gardens and grounds
around it filled up the space so made.  There was an entrance with 
large gates at each end of the village, and each gate was guarded by
the effigies of two huge pagans with clubs, such being the crest borne
by the family; from each entrance a broad road, quite straight, running
through a majestic avenue of limes, led up to the house.  This was
built in the richest, perhaps we should rather say in the purest, style
of Tudor architecture; so much so that, though Greshamsbury is less
complete than Longleat, less magnificent than Hatfield, it may in some
sense be said to be the finest specimen of Tudor architecture of which
the country can boast.

It stands amid a multitude of trim gardens and stone-built terraces,
divided one from another: these to our eyes are not so attractive as
that broad expanse of lawn by which our country houses are generally
surrounded; but the gardens of Greshamsbury have been celebrated for
two centuries, and any Gresham who would have altered them would have
been considered to have destroyed one of the well-known landmarks of
the family.

Greshamsbury Park--properly so called--spread far away on the other
side of the village.  Opposite to the two great gates leading up to the
mansion were two smaller gates, the one opening onto the stables,
kennels, and farm-yard, and the other to the deer park.  This latter
was the principal entrance to the demesne, and a grand and picturesque
entrance it was.  the avenue of limes which on one side stretched up to
the house, was on the other extended for a quarter of a mile, and then
appeared to be terminated only by an abrupt rise in the ground. At the
entrance there were four savages and four clubs, two to each portal,
and what with the massive iron gates, surmounted by a stone wall, on
which stood the family arms supported by two other club-bearers, the
stone-built lodges, the Doric, ivy-covered columns which surrounded the
circle, the four grim savages, and the extent of the space itself
through which the high road ran, and which just abutted on the village,
the spot was sufficiently significant of old family greatness. 

Those who examined it more closely might see that under the arms was a
scroll bearing the Gresham motto, and that the words were repeated in
smaller letters under each of the savages.  'Gardez Gresham', had been
chosen in the days of motto-choosing probably by some herald-at-arms as
an appropriate legend for signifying the peculiar attributes of the
family.  Now, however, unfortunately, men were not of one mind as to
the exact idea signified.  Some declared, with much heraldic warmth,
that it was an address to the savages, calling on them to take care of
their patron; while others, with whom I myself am inclined to agree,
averred with equal certainty that it was an advice to the people at
large, especially to those inclined to rebel against the aristocracy of
the county, that the should 'beware the Gresham'.  The latter
signification would betoken strength--so said the holders of the
doctrine; the former weakness.  Now the Greshams were ever a strong
people, and never addicted to humility.

We will not pretend to decide the question.  Alas!  either construction
was not equally unsuited to the family fortunes. Such changes had taken
place in England since the Greshams had founded themselves that no
savage could any longer in any way protect them; they must protect
themselves like common folk, or live unprotected.  Nor now was it
necessary that any neighbour should shake in his shoes when the Gresham
frowned. It would have been to be wished that the present Gresham
himself could have been as indifferent to the frowns of some of his
neighbours.  

But the old symbols remained, and may such symbols long remain among
us; they are still lovely and fit to be loved.  They tell us of the
true and manly feelings of other times; and to him who can read aright,
they explain more fully, more truly than any written history can do,
how Englishmen have become what they are.  England is not yet a
commercial country in the sense that epithet is used for her; and let
us still hope that she will not soon become so.  She might surely as
well be called feudal England, or chivalrous England.  If in western
civilized Europe, there does exist a nation among whom there are high
signors, and with whom the owners of the land are the true aristocracy,
the aristocracy is trusted as being best and fittest to rule, that
nation is the English.  Choose out the ten leading men of each great
European people.  Choose them in France, in Austria, Sardinia, Prussia,
Russia, Sweden, Denmark, Spain (?), and then select the ten in England
whose names are best known as those of leading statesmen; the result
will show in which country there still exists the closest attachment
to, the sincerest trust in, the old feudal and now so-called landed
interests.

England a commercial country!  Yes; as Venice was.  She may excel other
nations in commerce, but yet it is not that in which she most prides
herself, in which she most excels.  Merchants as such are not the first
men among us; though it perhaps be open, barely open, to a merchant to
become one of them.  Buying and selling is good and necessary; it is
very necessary, and may, possibly, be very good; but it cannot be the
noblest work of man; and let us hope that it may not be in your time be
esteemed the noblest work of any Englishman.

Greshamsbury Park was very large; it lay on the outside of the angle
formed by the village street, and stretched away on two sides without
apparent limit or boundaries visible from the village road or house. 
Indeed, the ground on this side was so broken up into abrupt hills, and
conical-shaped, oak-covered excrescences, which were seen peeping up
through and over each other, that the true extent of the park was much 
magnified to the eye.  It was very possible for a stranger to get into
it and to find some difficulty in getting out again by any of its known
gates; and such was the beauty of the landscape, that a lover or
scenery would be tempted thus to lose himself.

I have said that 