on one side lay the kennels, and this will give me an
opportunity of describing here one especial episode, a long episode, in
the life of the existing squire. 

He had once represented his county in Parliament, and when he ceased to
do so he still felt an ambition to be connected in some peculiar way
with that county's greatness; he still desired that a Gresham of
Greshamsbury should be something more in East Barsetshire, than Jackson
of the Grange, or Baker of Mill Hill, or Bateson of Annesgrove.  They
were all his friends, and very respectable country gentlemen; but Mr 
Gresham of Greshamsbury should be more than this: even he had enough
ambition to be aware of such a longing.  Therefore, when an opportunity
occurred he took to hunting the county.

For this employment he was in every way well suited;--unless it was in
the matter of finance.  Though he had in his very earliest manly years
given such great offence by indifference to his family politics, and
had in a certain degree fostered the ill-feeling by contesting the
county in opposition to the wishes of his brother squires,
nevertheless, he bore a loved and popular name.  Men regretted that he
should not have been what they wished him to be, that he should not
have been such as was the old squire; but when they found that such was
the case, that he could not be great among them as a politician, they
were still willing that he should be great in any other way if there
were county greatness for which he was suited.  Now he was known as an
excellent horseman, as a thorough sportsman, as one knowing in dogs,
and tender-hearted as a sucking mother to a litter of young foxes; he
had ridden in the county since he was fifteen, and had a fine voice for
a view hallo, knew every hound by name, and could wind a horn with
sufficient music for all hunting purposes; moreover, he had come to his
property, as was well known through all Barsetshire, with a clear
income of fourteen thousand a year.

Thus, when some old worn-out master of hounds was run to ground, about
a year after Mr Gresham's last contest for the county, it seemed to all
parties to be a pleasant and rational arrangement that the hounds
should go to Greshamsbury.  Pleasant, indeed, to all except the Lady 
Arabella; and rational, perhaps, to all except the squire himself.

All this time he was already considerable encumbered.  He had spent
much more than he should have done, and so indeed had his wife, in
those two splendid years in which they had figured as great among the
great ones of the earth.  Fourteen thousand a year ought to have been
enough to allow a member of Parliament with a young wife and two or
three children to live in London and keep up their country family
mansion; but then the De Courcys were very great people, and Lady
Arabella chose to live as she had been accustomed to do, and as her 
sister-in-law the countess lived; now Lord de Courcy had much more than
fourteen thousand a year.  Then came the three elections, with their
vast attendant cost, and then those costly expedients to which
gentlemen are forced to have recourse who have lived beyond their
income and find it impossible to reduce their establishments as to live
much below it.  Thus when the hounds came to Greshamsbury, Mr Gresham
was already a poor man.

Lady Arabella said much to oppose their coming; but Lady Arabella,
though it could hardly be said of her that she was under her husband's
rule, certainly was not entitled to boast that she had made him under
hers.  She then made her first grand attack as to the furniture in
Portman Square; and was then for the first time specially informed that
the furniture there was not matter of much importance, as she would not
in future be required to move her family to that residence during the
London seasons.  The sort of conversation which grew from such a
commencement may be imagined.  Had Lady Arabella worried her lord less,
he might perhaps have considered with more coolness the folly of
encountering so prodigious an increase to the expense of his
establishment; had he not spent so much money in a pursuit which his
wife did not enjoy, she might perhaps have been more sparing in her 
rebukes as to his indifference to her London pleasures.  As it was, the
hounds came to Greshamsbury, and Lady Arabella did go to London for
some period in each year, and the family expenses were by no means
lessened.

The kennels, however, were now again empty.  Two years previous to the
time at which our story begins, the hounds had been carried off to the
seat of some richer sportsman.  This was more felt by Mr Gresham than
any other misfortune which he had yet incurred.  He had been master of
hounds for ten years, and that work he had at any rate done well.  The 
popularity among his neighbours which he had lost as a politician he
had regained as a sportsman, and he would fain have remained autocratic
in the hunt, had it been possible.  But he so remained much longer than
he should have done, and at last they went away, not without signs and
sounds of visible joy on the part of Lady Arabella.

But we have kept the Greshamsbury tenancy waiting under the oak-trees
by far too long.  Yes; when young Frank came of age there was still
enough left at Greshamsbury, still means enough at the squire's
disposal, to light one bonfire, to roast, whole in its skin, one
bullock.  Frank's virility came on him not quite unmarked, as that of
the parson's sons might do, or the son of a neighbouring attorney.  It
could still be reported in the Barsetshire Conservative "Standard" that
'The beards waggled all,' at Greshamsbury, now as they had done for
many centuries on similar festivals.  Yes; it was so reported.  But
this, like so many other such reports, had but a shadow of truth in
it.  'They poured the liquor in,' certainly, those who were there; but
the beards did not wag as they had been wont to wag in former years. 
Beards won't wag for the telling.  The squire was at his wits' end for 
money, and the tenants one and all had so heard.  Rents had been raised
on them; timber had fallen fast; the lawyer on the estate was growing
rich; tradesmen in Barchester, nay, in Greshamsbury itself, were
beginning to mutter; and the squire himself would not be merry. Under
such circumstances the throats of the tenantry will still swallow, but
their beards will not wag.

'I minds well,' said Farmer Oaklerath to his neighbour, 'when the
squire hisself comed of age.  Lord love 'ee!  There was fun going that
day.  There was more yale dranke then than's been brewed at the big
house these two years.  T'old squoire was a one'er.'

'And I minds when the squoire was borned; minds it well,' said an old
farmer sitting opposite.  'Them was the days!  It an't that long age
neither.  Squoire a'nt come o' fifty yet; no, nor an't nigh it, though
he looks it.  Things be altered at Greemsbury'--such was the rural
pronunciation--'altered sadly, neebor Oaklerath.  Well, well; I'll soon
be gone, I will, and so it an't no use talking; but arter paying one 
pound fifteen for them acres for more nor fifty year, I didn't think
I'd ever be axed for forty shilling.'

Such was the style of conversation which went on at the various
tables.  It had certainly been of a very different tone when the squire
was born, when he came of age, and when, just two years subsequently,
his son had been born.  On each of these events similar rural fetes had
been given, and the squire himself had on these occasions been frequent
among his guests. On the first, he had been carried round by his 
father, a whole train of ladies and nurses following.  On the second,
he had himself mixed in all the sports, the gayest of the gay, and each
tenant had squeezed his way up to the lawn to get a sight of the Lady
Arabella, who, as was already known, was to come from Courcy Castle to
Greshamsbury to be their mistress.  It was little they any of them
cared now for the Lady Arabella.  On the third, he himself had borne
him; his child in his arms as his father had before borne him; he was
in the zenith of his pride, and though the tenantry had whispered that
he was somewhat less familiar with them than of yore, that he had put
on somewhat too much of the De Courcy airs, still he was their squire,
their master, the rich man in whose hand they lay.  The old squire was
then gone, and they were proud of the young member and his lady bride
in spite of a little hauteur.  None of them were proud of him now.

He walked once round among the guests, and spoke a few words of welcome
at each table; and as he did so the tenants got up and bowed and wished
health to the old squire, happiness to the young one, and prosperity to
Greshamsbury; but, nevertheless, it was but a tame affair.

There were also other visitors, of the gentle sort, to do honour to the
occasion; but not such swarms, not such a crowd at the mansion itself
and at the houses of the neighbouring gentry as had always been
collected on these former gala doings.  Indeed, the party at
Greshamsbury was not a large one, and consisted chiefly of Lady de
Courcy and her suite.  Lady Arabella still kept up, as far as she was
able, her close connexion with Courcy Castle.  She was there as much as
possible, to which Mr Gresham never objected; and she took her
daughters there whenever she could, though, as regarded the two elder
girls, she was interfered with by Mr Gresham, and not unfrequently by
the girls themselves.  Lady Arabella had a pride in her son, though he
was by no means her favourite child.  He was, however, the heir of
Greshamsbury, of which fact she was disposed to make the most, and he
was also a fine open-hearted young man, who could not but be dear to
any mother.  Lady Arabella did love him dearly, though she felt a sort
of disappointment in regard to him, seeing that he was not so much like
a De Courcy as he should have been.  She did love him dearly; and,
therefore, when he came of age she got her sister-in-law and all the
Ladies Amelia, Rosina etc. to come to Greshamsbury; and she also, with
some difficulty, persuaded the Honourable Georges and the Honourable
Johns to be equally condescending.  Lord de Courcy himself was in
attendance at the Court--or said that he was--and Lord Porlock, the
eldest son, simply told his aunt when he was invited that he never
bored himself with those sort of things.

Then there were the Bakers, and the Batesons, and the Jacksons, who all
lived near and returned home at night; there was the Reverend Caleb
Oriel, the High-Church rector, with his beautiful sister Patience
Oriel; there was Mr Yates Umbleby, the attorney and agent; and there
was Dr Thorne, and the doctor's modest, quiet-looking little niece,
Miss Mary.



CHAPTER II

LONG, LONG AGO

As Dr Thorne is our hero--or I should rather say my hero, a privilege
of selecting for themselves in this respect being left to all my
readers--and as Miss Mary Thorne is to be our heroine, a point on which
no choice whatsoever is left to any one, it is necessary that they
shall be introduced and explained and described in a proper, formal
manner.  I feel quite an apology is due for beginning a novel with two
long dull chapters full of description.  I am perfectly aware of the
danger of such a course.  In so doing I sin against the golden rule
which requires us all to put our best foot foremost, the wisdom of
which is fully recognized by novelists, myself among the number.  It
can hardly be expected that any one will consent to go through with a 
fiction that offers so little allurement in its first pages; but twist
it as I will I cannot do otherwise.  I find that I cannot make poor Mr
Gresham hem and haw and turn himself uneasily in his arm-chair in a
natural manner till I have said why he is uneasy.  I cannot bring my
doctor speaking his mind freely among the bigwigs till I have explained
that it is in accordance with his usual character to do so.  This is 
unartistic on my part, and shows want of imagination as well as want of
skill.  Whether or not I can atone for these faults by straightforward,
simple, plain story-telling--that, indeed, is very doubtful.

Dr Thorne belonged to a family in one sense as good, and at any rate as
old, as that of Mr Gresham; and much older, he was apt to boast, than
that of the De Courcys.  This trait in his character is mentioned
first, as it was the weakness for which he was most conspicuous.  He
was second cousin to Mr Thorne of Ullathorne, a Barsetshire squire
living in the neighbourhood of Barchester, and who boasted that his
estate had remained in his family, descending from Thorne to Thorne, 
longer than had been the case with any other estate or any other family
in the county.

But Dr Thorne was only a second cousin; and, therefore, though he was
entitled to talk of the blood as belonging to some extent to himself,
he had no right to lay claim to any position in the county other than
such as he might win for himself if he chose to locate himself in it. 
This was a fact of which no one was more fully aware than our doctor
himself. 
 
His father, who had been first cousin of a former Squire Thorne, had
been a clerical dignitary in Barchester, but had been dead now many
years.  He had had two sons; one he had educated as a medical man, but
the other, and the younger, whom he had intended for the Bar, had not
betaken himself in any satisfactory way to any calling.  This son had
been first rusticated from Oxford, and then expelled; and thence 
returning to Barchester, had been the cause to his father and brother
of much suffering.

Old Dr Thorne, the clergyman, died when the two brothers were yet young
men, and left behind him nothing but some household and other property
of the value of about two thousand pounds, which he bequeathed to
Thomas, the elder son, much more than that having been spent in
liquidating debts contracted by the younger.  Up to that time there had
been close harmony between the Ullathorne family and that of the
clergyman; but a month or two before the doctor's death--the period of 
which we are speaking was about two-and-twenty years before the
commencement of our story--the then Mr Thorne of Ullathorne had made it
understood that he would no longer receive at his house his cousin
Henry, whom he regarded as a disgrace to the family.

Fathers are apt to be more lenient to their sons than uncles to their
nephews, or cousins to each other.  Dr Thorne still hoped to reclaim
his black sheep, and thought that the head of his family showed an
unnecessary harshness in putting an obstacle in his way of doing so. 
And if the father was warm in support of his profligate son, the young
medical aspirant was warmer in support of his profligate brother.  Dr
Thorne, junior, was no roue himself, but perhaps, as a young man, he 
had not sufficient abhorrence of his brother's vices.  At any rate, he
stuck to him manfully; and when it was signified in the Close that
Henry's company was not considered desirable at Ullathorne, Dr Thomas
Thorne sent word to the squire that under such circumstances his visits
there would also cease.

This was not very prudent, as the young Galen had elected to establish
himself in Barchester, very mainly in expectation for the help which
his Ullathorne connexion would give him.  This, however, in his anger
he failed to consider; he was never known, either in early or in middle
life, to consider in his anger those points which were probably best
worth his consideration.  This, perhaps, was of the less moment as his 
anger was of an unenduring kind, evaporating frequently with more
celerity than he could get angry words out of his mouth. With the
Ullathorne people, however, he did establish a quarrel sufficiently
permanent to be of vital injury to his medical prospects.

And then the father died, and the two brothers were left living
together with very little means between them.  At this time there was
living in Barchester, people of the name of Scatcherd.  Of that family,
as then existing, we have only to do with two, a brother and a sister. 
They were in a low rank of life, the one being a journeyman
stone-mason, and the other an apprentice to a straw-bonnet maker; but
they were, nevertheless, in some sort remarkable people.  The sister
was reputed in Barchester to be a model of female beauty of the strong
and robuster cast, and had also a better reputation as being a girl of
good character and honest, womanly conduct.  Both of her beauty and of
her reputation her brother was exceedingly proud, and he was the more
so when he learnt that she had been asked in marriage by a decent
master-tradesman in the city.

Roger Scatcherd had also a reputation, but not for beauty or propriety
of conduct.  He was known for the best stone-mason in the four
counties, and as the man who could, on occasion, drink the most alcohol
in a given time in the same localities.  As a workman, indeed, he had
higher reputation even than this: he was not only a good and very quick
stone-mason, but he had also a capacity for turning other men into good
stone-masons: he had a gift of knowing what a man could and should do;
and, by degrees, he taught himself what five, and ten, and
twenty--latterly, what a thousand and two thousand men might accomplish
among them: this, also, he did with very little aid from pen and paper,
with which he was not, and never became, very conversant.  He had also
other gifts and other propensities.  He could talk in a manner 
dangerous to himself and to others; he could persuade without knowing
that he did so; and being himself an extreme demagogue, in those noisy
times just prior to the Reform Bill, he created a hubbub in Barchester
of which he himself had had no previous conception.

Henry Thorne among his other bad qualities had one which his friends
regarded as worse than all the others, and which perhaps justified the
Ullathorne people in their severity.  He loved to consort with low
people.  He not only drank in tap-rooms with vulgar drinkers; so said
his friends, and so said his enemies.  He denied the charge as being
made in the plural number, and declared that his only low co-reveller
was Roger Scatcherd.  With Roger Scatcherd, at any rate, he associated,
and became as democratic as Roger himself.  Now the Thornes of
Ullathorne were of the very highest order of Tory excellence.

Whether or not Mary Scatcherd at once accepted the offer of the
respectable tradesman, I cannot say.  After the occurrence of certain
events which must here shortly be told, she declared that she had never
done so.  Her brother averred that she most positively had.  The
respectable tradesman himself refused to speak on the subject.

It is certain, however, that Scatcherd, who had hitherto been silent
enough about his sister in those social hours which he passed with his
gentleman friend, boasted of the engagement when it was, as he said,
made; and then boasted also of the girl's beauty.  Scatcherd, in spite
of his occasional intemperance, looked up in the world, and the coming
marriage of his sister was, he thought, suitable to his own ambition 
for his family.

Henry Thorne had already heard of, and already seen, Mary Scatcherd;
but hitherto she had not fallen in the way of his wickedness.  Now,
however, when he heard that she was to be decently married, the devil
tempted him to tempt her.  It boots not to tell all the tale.  It came
out clearly enough when all was told, that he made her most distinct
promises of marriage; he even gave her such in writing; and having in 
this way obtained from her her company during some of her little
holidays--her Sundays or summer evenings--he seduced her.  Scatcherd
accused him openly of having intoxicated her with drugs; and Thomas
Thorne, who took up the case, ultimately believed the charge.  It
became known in Barchester that she was with child, and that the
seducer was Henry Thorne.

Roger Scatcherd, when the news first reached him, filled himself with
drink, and then swore that he would kill them both.  With manly wrath,
however, he set forth, first against the man, and that with manly
weapons.  He took nothing with him but his fists and a big stick as he
went in search of Henry Thorne.

The two brothers were then lodging together at a farm-house close
abutting on the town.  This was not an eligible abode for a medical
practitioner; but the young doctor had not been able to settle himself
eligibly since his father's death; and wishing to put what constraint
he could upon his brother, had so located himself.  To this farm-house
came Roger Scatcherd one sultry summer evening, his anger gleaming from
his bloodshot eyes, and his rage heightened to madness by the rapid
pace at which he had run from the city, and by the ardent spirits which
were fermenting within him.

At the very gate of the farm-yard, standing placidly with his cigar in
his mouth, he encountered Henry Thorne.  He had thought of searching
for him through the whole premises, of demanding his victim with loud
exclamations, and making his way to him through all obstacles.  In lieu
of that, there stood the man before him.

'Well, Roger, what's in the wind?' said Henry Thorne.

They were the last words he ever spoke.  He was answered by a blow from
the blackthorn.  A contest ensued; which ended in Scatcherd keeping his
word--at any rate, as regarded the worst offender.  How the fatal blow
on the temple was struck was never exactly determined; one medical man
said it might have been done in a fight with a heavy-headed stick;
another thought that a stone had been used; a third suggested a 
stone-mason's hammer.  It seemed, however, to be proved subsequently
that no hammer was taken out, and Scatcherd himself persisted in
declaring that he had taken in his hand no weapon but the stick. 
Scatcherd, however, was drunk; and even though he intended to tell the
truth, may have been mistaken.  There were, however, the facts that
Thorne was dead; that Scatcherd had sworn to kill him about an hour 
previously; and that he had without delay accomplished the threat.  He
was arrested and tried with murder, all the distressing circumstances
of the case came out on the trial: he was found guilty of
man-slaughter, and sentenced to be imprisoned for six months.  Our
readers will probably think that the punishment was too severe.

Thomas Thorne and the farmer were on the spot soon after Henry Thorne
had fallen.  The brother was at first furious for vengeance against his
brother's murderer; but, as the facts came out, as he learnt what had
been the provocation given, what had been the feelings of Scatcherd
when he left the city, determined to punish him who had ruined his
sister, his heart was changed.  Those were trying days for him.  It 
behoved him to do what in him lay to cover his brother's memory from
the obloquy which it deserved; it behoved him also to save, or to
assist to save, from undue punishment the unfortunate man who had shed
his brother's blood; and it behoved him also, at least so he thought,
to look after that poor fallen one whose misfortunes were less merited
than those either of his brother or of hers.

And he was not the man to get through these things lightly, or with as
much ease as he perhaps might conscientiously have done.  He would pay
for the defence of the prisoner; he would pay for the defence of his
brother's memory; and he would pay for the poor girl's comforts.  He
would do this, and he would allow no one to help him.  He stood alone
in the world, and insisted on so standing.  Old Mr Thorne of Ullathorne
offered again to open his arms to him; but he had conceived a foolish 
idea that his cousin's severity had driven his brother on to his bad
career, and he would consequently accept no kindness from Ullathorne. 
Miss Thorne, the old squire's daughter--a cousin considerably older
than himself, to whom he had at one time been much attached--sent him
money; and he returned it to her under a blank cover.  He had still
enough for those unhappy purposes which he had in hand.  As to what
might happen afterwards, he was then mainly indifferent.

The affair made much noise in the county, and was inquired into closely
by many of the county magistrates; by none more closely than by John
Newbold Gresham, with the energy and justice shown by Dr Thorne on the
occasion; and when the trial was over, he invited him to Greshamsbury. 
The visit ended in the doctor establishing himself in the village.

We must return for a moment to Mary Scatcherd.  She was saved from the
necessity of encountering her brother's wrath, for that brother was
under arrest for murder before he could get at her.  Her immediate lot,
however, was a cruel one.  Deep as was her cause for anger against the
man who had so inhumanly used her, still it was natural that she should
turn to him with love rather than with aversion.  To whom else could
she in such plight look for love?  When, therefore, she heard that he
was slain, her heart sank within her; she turned her face to the wall,
and laid herself down to die; to die a double death, for herself and
the fatherless babe that was now quick within her. 

But, in fact, life had still much to offer, both to her and her child. 
For her it was still destined that she should, in a distant land, be
the worthy wife of a good husband, and the happy mother of many
children.  For that embryo one it was destined--but that may not be so
quickly told: to describe her destiny this volume has yet to be
written.

Even in those bitterest days God tempered the wind to the shorn lamb. 
Dr Thorne was by her bedside soon after the bloody tidings had reached
her, and did for her more than either her lover or her brother could
have done.  When the baby was born, Scatcherd was still in prison, and
had still three months' more confinement to undergo.  The story of her 
great wrongs and cruel usage as much talked of, and men said that one
who had been so injured should be regarded as having in nowise sinned
at all. 

One man, at any rate, so thought.  At twilight, one evening, Thorne was
surprised by a visit from a demure Barchester hardware dealer, whom he
did not remember ever to have addressed before.  This was the former
lover of the poor Mary Scatcherd.  He had a proposal to make and it was
this:--if Mary would consent to leave the country at once, to leave it 
without notice from her brother, or talk or eclat on the matter, he
would sell all that he had, marry her, and emigrate. There was but one
condition; she must leave her baby behind her.  The hardware-man could
find it in his heart to be generous, to be generous and true to his
love; but he could not be generous enough to father the seducer's
child.

'I could never abide it, sir, if I took it,' said he; 'and she,--why in
course she would always love it the best.'

In praising his generosity, who can mingle any censure for such
manifest prudence?  He would still make her the wife of his bosom,
defiled in the eyes of the world as she had been; but she must be to
him the mother of his own children, not the mother of another's child.

And now again our doctor had a hard task to win through.  He saw at
once that it was his duty to use his utmost authority to induce the
poor girl to accept such an offer.  She liked the man; and here was
opened to her a course which would have been most desirable, even
before her misfortune.  But it is hard to persuade a mother to part
with her first babe; harder, perhaps, when the babe had been so
fathered and so born than when the world has shone brightly on its
earliest hours.  She at first refused stoutly: she sent a thousand 
loves, a thousand thanks, profusest acknowledgements for his generosity
to the man who showed her that he loved her so well; but Nature, she
said, would not let her leave her child.

'And what will you do for her here, Mary?' said the doctor.  Poor Mary
replied to him with a deluge of tears.

'She is my niece,'said the doctor, taking up the tiny infant in his
huge hands; 'she is already the nearest thing, the only thing that I
have in the world.  I am her uncle, Mary.  If you will go with this man
I will be father to her and mother to her.  Of what bread I eat, she
shall eat; of what cup I drink, she shall drink.  See, Mary, here is
the Bible;' and he covered the book with his hand, 'Leave her to me,
and by this word she shall be my child.'

The mother consented at last; left her baby with the doctor, married,
and went to America.  All this was consummated before Roger Scatcherd
was liberated from jail.  Some conditions the doctor made.  The first
was, that Scatcherd should not know his sister's child was thus
disposed of.  Dr Thorne, in undertaking to bring up the baby, did not
choose to encounter any girl's relations on the other side.  Relations
she would undoubtedly have had none had she been left to live or die as
a workhouse bastard; but should the doctor succeed in life, should he
ultimately be able to make this girl the darling of his own house, and
then the darling of some other house, should she live and win the heart
of some man whom the doctor might delight to call his friend and 
nephew; then relations might spring up whose ties would not 
advantageous.

No man plumed himself on good blood more than Dr Thorne; no man had
greater pride in his genealogical tree, and his hundred and thirty
clearly descendant from MacAdam; no man had a stronger theory as to the
advantage held by men who have grandfathers over those who have none,
or have none worth talking about.  Let it not be thought that our
doctor was a perfect character. No, indeed; most far from perfect.  He
had within him an inner, stubborn, self-admiring pride, which made him
believe himself to be better and higher than those around him, and this
from some unknown cause which he could hardly explain to himself.  He
had a pride in being a poor man of a high family; he had a pride in
repudiating the very family of which he was proud; and he had a special
pride in keeping his pride silently to himself.  His father had been a
Thorne, his mother a Thorold. There was no better blood to be had in
England.  It was in the possession of such properties as these that he
condescended to rejoice; this man, with a man's heart, a man's courage,
and a man's humanity!  Other doctors round the county had ditch-water
in their veins; he could boast of a pure ichor, to which that of the
great Omnium family was but a muddy puddle.  It was thus that he loved
to excel his brother practitioners, he who might have indulged in the
pride of excelling them both in talent and in energy!  We speak now of
his early days; but even in his maturer life, the man, though mellowed,
was the same.

This was the man who now promised to take to his bosom as his own child
a poor bastard whose father was already dead, and whose mother's family
was such as the Scatcherds!  It was necessary that the child's history
should be known to none.  Except to the mother's brother it was an
object of interest to no one.  The mother had for some short time been
talked of; but now that the nine-days' wonder was a wonder no longer. 
She went off to her far-away home; her husband's generosity was duly
chronicled in the papers, and the babe was left untalked of and
unknown.

It was easy to explain to Scatcherd that the child had not lived. There
was a parting interview between the brother and sister in the jail,
during which with real tears and unaffected sorrow, the mother thus
accounted for the offspring of her shame.  Then she started, fortunate
in her coming fortunes; and the doctor took with him his charge to the
new country in which they were both to live.  There he found for her a
fitting home till she should be old enough to sit at his table and live
in his bachelor house; and no one but old Mr Gresham knew who she was,
or whence she had come.

Then Roger Scatcherd, having completed his six months' confinement,
came out of prison.

Roger Scatcherd, though his hands were now red with blood, was to be
pitied.  A short time before the days of Henry Thorne's death he had
married a young wife in his own class of life, and had made many
resolves that henceforward his conduct should be such as might become a
married man, and might not disgrace the respectable brother-in-law he
was about to have given him such was his condition when he first heard
of his sister's plight. As has been said, he filled himself with drink
and started off on the scent of blood.

During his prison days his wife had to support herself as she might. 
The decent articles of furniture which they had put together were sold;
she gave up their little house, and, bowed down by misery, she also was
brought near to death.  When he was liberated he at once got work; but
those who have watched the lives of such people know how hard it is for
them to recover lost ground.  She became a mother immediately after his
liberation, and when her child was born they were in direst want; for
Scatcherd was again drinking, and his resolves were blown to the wind.

The doctor was then living at Greshamsbury.  He had gone over there
before the day on which he undertook the charge of poor Mary's baby,
and soon found himself settled as the Greshamsbury doctor.  This
occurred very soon after the birth of the young heir.  His predecessor
in this career had 'bettered' himself, or endeavoured to do so, by
seeking the practice of some large town, and Lady Arabella, at a very 
critical time, was absolutely left with no other advice than that of a
stranger, picked up, as she declared to Lady de Courcy, somewhere
between Barchester jail, or Barchester court-house, she did not know
which.

Of course Lady Arabella could not suckle the young heir herself. Ladies
Arabella never can.  They are gifted with the powers of being mothers,
but not nursing-mothers.  Nature gives them bosoms for show, but not
for use.  So Lady Arabella had a wet-nurse.  At the end of six months
the new doctor found Master Frank was not doing quite so well as he 
should do; and after a little trouble it was discovered that the very
excellent young woman who had been sent express from Courcy Castle to
Greshamsbury--a supply being kept up on the lord's demesne for the
family use--was fond of brandy.  She was at once sent back to the
castle, of course; and, as Lady de Courcy was too much in dudgeon to
send another, Dr Thorne was allowed to procure one.  He thought of the
misery of Roger Scatcherd's wife, though also of her health and 
strength, and active habits; and thus Mrs Scatcherd became the
foster-mother to young Gresham.

One other episode we must tell of past times.  Previous to his father's
death, Dr Thorne was in love.  Nor had he altogether sighed and pleaded
in vain; though it had not quite come to that, the young lady's
friends, or even the young lady herself, had actually accepted his
suit.  At that time his name stood well in Barchester.  His father was
a prebendary; his cousins and his best friends were the Thornes of
Ullathorne, and the lady, who shall be nameless, was not thought to be
injudicious in listening to the young doctor.  But when Henry Thorne
went so far astray, when the old doctor died, when the young doctor
quarrelled with Ullathorne, when the brother was killed in a
disgraceful quarrel, and it turned out that the physician had nothing
but his profession and no settled locality in which to exercise it;
then, indeed, the young lady's friends thought that she was 
injudicious, and the young lady herself had not spirit enough, or love
enough, to be disobedient.  In those stormy days of the trial she told
Dr Thorne, that perhaps it would be wise that they should not see each
other any more.

Dr Thorne, so counselled, at such a moment,--so informed then, when he
most required comfort from his love, at once swore loudly that he
agreed with her.  He rushed forth with a bursting heart, and said to
himself that the world was bad, all bad.  He saw the lady no more; and,
if I am rightly informed, never again made matrimonial overtures to any
one.



CHAPTER III

DR THORNE

And thus Dr Thorne became settled for life in the little village of
Greshamsbury.  As was then the wont with many country practitioners,
and as should be the wont with them all if they consulted their own
dignity a little less and the comforts of their customers somewhat
more, he added the business of a dispensing apothecary to that of a
physician.  In doing so, he was of course much reviled.  Many people 
around him declared that he could not truly be a doctor, or, at any
rate, a doctor to be so called; and his brethren in the art living
round him, though they knew that his diplomas, degrees, and
certificates were all en regle, rather countenanced the report.  There
was much about this new-comer which did not endear him to his own
profession.  In the first place he was a new-comer, and, as such, was
of course to be regarded by other doctors as being de trop. 
Greshamsbury was only fifteen miles from Barchester, where there was a
regular depot of medical skill, and but eight from Silverbridge, where
a properly established physician had been in residence for the last
forty years.  Dr Thorne's predecessor at Greshamsbury had been a
humble-minded general practitioner, gifted with a due respect for the
physicians of the county; and he, though he had been allowed to physic
the servants, and sometimes the children of Greshamsbury, had never had
the presumption to put himself on a par with his betters.

Then also, Dr Thorne, though a graduated physician, though entitled
beyond all dispute to call himself a doctor, according to all the laws
of the colleges, made it known to the East Barsetshire world, very soon
after he had seated himself at Greshamsbury, that his rate of pay was
to be seven-and-sixpence a visit within a circuit of five miles, with a
proportionally increased charge at proportionally increased distances. 
Now there was something low, mean, unprofessional, and democratic in
this; so, at least, said the children of AEsculapius gathered together
in conclave at Barchester.  In the first place, it showed that this
Thorne was always thinking of his money, like an apothecary, as he was;
whereas, it would have behoved him, as a physician, had he had the
feelings of a physician under his hat, to have regarded his own
pursuits in a purely philosophical spirit, and to have taken any gain
which might have accrued as an accidental adjunct to his station in
life. A physician should take his fee without letting his left hand
know what his right hand was doing; it should be taken without a
thought, without a look, without a move of the facial muscles; the true
physician should hardly be aware that the last friendly grasp of the
hand had been more precious by the touch of gold.  Whereas, that fellow
Thorne would lug out half a crown from his breeches pocket and give it
in change for a ten shilling piece.  And then it was clear that this
man had no appreciation of the dignity of a learned profession.  He 
might constantly be seen compounding medicines in the shop, at the left
hand of his front door; not making experiments philosophically in
materials medica for the benefit of coming ages--which, if he did, he
should have done in the seclusion of his study, far from profane
eyes--but positively putting together common powders for rural bowels,
or spreading vulgar ointments for agricultural ailments.

A man of this sort was not fit for society for Dr Fillgrave of
Barchester.  That must be admitted.  And yet he had been found to be
fit society for the old squire of Greshamsbury, whose shoe-ribbons Dr
Fillgrave would not have objected to tie; so high did the old squire
stand in the county just previous to his death.  But the spirit of the
Lady Arabella was known by the medical profession of Barsetshire, and
when that good man died it was felt that Thorne's short tenure of 
Greshamsbury favour was already over.  The Barsetshire regulars were,
however, doomed to disappointment.  Our doctor had already contrived to
endear himself to the heir; and though there was not even much personal
love between him and the Lady Arabella, he kept his place at the great
house unmoved, not only in the nursery and in the bedrooms, but also at
the squire's dining-table.

Now there was in this, it must be admitted, quite enough to make him
unpopular with his brethren; and this feeling was soon shown in a
marked and dignified manner.  Dr Fillgrave, who had certainly the most
respectable professional connexion in the county, who had a reputation
to maintain, and who was accustomed to meet, on almost equal terms, the
great medical baronets from the metropolis at the houses of the
nobility--Dr Fillgrave declined to meet Dr Thorne in consultation.  He
exceedingly regretted, he said, most exceedingly, the necessity he felt
of doing so: he had never before had to perform so painful a duty; but,
as a duty which he owed to his profession, he must perform it.  With
every feeling of respect of Lady -,--a sick guest at Greshamsbury,--and
for Mr Gresham, he must decline to attend in conjunction with Dr 
Thorne.  If his services could be made available under any other
circumstances, he would go to Greshamsbury as fast as post-horses could
carry him.

Then, indeed, there was war in Barsetshire.  If there was on Dr
Thorne's cranium one bump more developed than another, it was that of
combativeness.  Not that the doctor was a bully, or even pugnacious, in
the usual sense of the word; he had no disposition to provoke a fight,
no propense love of quarrelling; but there was that in him which would
allow him to yield to no attack.  Neither in argument nor in contest 
would he ever allow himself to be wrong; never at least to anyone but
himself; and on behalf of his special hobbies, he was ready to meet the
world at large.

It will therefore be understood, that when such a gauntlet was thus
thrown in his very teeth by Dr Fillgrave, he was not slow to take it
up.  He addressed a letter to the Barsetshire Conservative Standard, in
which he attacked Dr Fillgrave with some considerable acerbity.  Dr
Fillgrave responded in four lines, saying that on mature consideration
he had made up his mind not to notice any remarks that might be made on
him by Dr Thorne in the public press.  The Greshamsbury doctor then 
wrote another letter, more witty and much more severe than the last;
and as this was copied into the Bristol, Exeter, and Gloucester papers,
Dr Fillgrave found it very difficult to maintain the magnanimity of his
reticence.  It is sometimes becoming enough for a Mediterranean to wrap
himself in the dignified toga of silence, and proclaim himself 
indifferent to public attacks; but it is a sort of dignity which it is
very difficult to maintain.  As well might a man, when stung to madness
by wasps, endeavour to sit in his chair without moving a muscle, as
endure with patience and without reply the courtesies of a newspaper
opponent.  Dr Thorne wrote a third letter which was too much for
medical flesh and blood to bear.  Dr Fillgrave answered it, not,
indeed, in his own name, but in that of a brother doctor; and then the
war raged merrily.  It is hardly too much to say that Dr Fillgrave
never knew another happy hour.  Had he dreamed of what materials was
made that young compounder of doses at Greshamsbury he would have met
him in consultation, morning, noon, and night, without objection; but
having begun the war, he was constrained to go on with it: his brethren
would allow him no alternative.  Thus he was continually being brought
up to the fight, as a prize-fighter may be seen to be, who is carried
up round after round, without any hope on his own part, and who, in
each round, drops to the ground before the very wind of his opponent's
blows.

But Dr Fillgrave, though thus weak himself, was backed in practice and
in countenance by nearly all his brethren in the county.  The guinea
fee, the principle of giving advice and of selling no medicine, the
great resolve to keep a distinct barrier between the physician and the
apothecary, and, above all, the hatred of the contamination of a bill,
were strong in the medical mind of Barsetshire.  Dr Thorne had the 
provincial medical world against him, and so he appealed to the
metropolis.  The Lancet took the matter up in his favour, but the
Journal of Medical Science was against him; the Weekly Chirurgeon,
noted for its medical democracy, upheld him as a medical prophet, but
the Scalping Knife, a monthly periodical got up in dead opposition to
the Lancet, showed him no mercy. So the war went on, and our doctor, to
a certain extent, became a noted character. 

He had, moreover, other difficulties to encounter in his professional
career.  It was something in his favour that he understood his
business; something that he was willing to labour at it with energy;
and resolved to labour at it conscientiously.  He had also other gifts,
such as conversational brilliancy, and aptitude for true good 
fellowship, firmness in friendship, and general honesty of disposition,
which stood him in stead as he advanced in life. But, at his first
starting, much that belonged to himself personally was against him. Let
him enter what house he would, he entered it with a conviction, often
expressed to himself, that he was equal as a man to the proprietor,
equal as a human being to the proprietress.  To age he would allow 
deference, and to special recognized talent--at least so he said; to
rank also, he would pay that respect which was its clear and recognized
prerogative; he would let a lord walk out of a room before him if he
did not happen to forget it; in speaking to a duke he would address him
as His Grace; and he would in no way assume a familiarity with bigger
men than himself, allowing to the bigger man the privilege of making 
the first advances.  But beyond this he would admit that no man should
walk the earth with his head higher than his own.

He did not talk of these things much; he offended no rank by boasts of
his own equality; he did not absolutely tell the Earl de Courcy in
words, that the privilege of dining at Courcy Castle was to him no
greater than the privilege of dining at Courcy Parsonage; but there was
that in his manner that told it.  The feeling in itself was perhaps
good, and was certainly much justified by the manner in which he bore 
himself to those below him in rank; but there was folly in the
resolution to run counter to the world's recognized rules on such
matters; and much absurdity in his mode of doing so, seeing that at
heart he was a thorough Conservative.  It is hardly too much to say
that he naturally hated a lord at first sight; but, nevertheless, he
would have expended his means, his blood, and spirit, in fighting for
the upper house of Parliament.

Such a disposition, until it was thoroughly understood, did not tend to
ingratiate him with the wives of the country gentlemen among whom he
had to look for practice.  And then, also, there was not much in his
individual manner to recommend him to the favour of ladies.  He was
brusque, authoritative, given to contradiction, rough though never 
dirty in his personal belongings, and inclined to indulge in a sort of
quiet raillery, which sometimes was not thoroughly understood.  People
did not always know whether he was laughing at them or with them; and
some people were, perhaps, inclined to think that a doctor should not
laugh at all when called in to act doctorially. 

When he was known, indeed, when the core of the fruit had been reached,
when the huge proportion of that loving trusting heart had been
learned, and understood, and appreciated, when that honesty had been
recognized, that manly, almost womanly tenderness had been felt, then,
indeed, the doctor was acknowledged to be adequate in his profession. 

To trifling ailments he was too often brusque.  Seeing that he accepted
money for the cure of such, he should, we may say, have cured them
without an offensive manner.  So far he is without defence.  But to
real suffering no one found him brusque; no patient lying painfully on
a bed of sickness ever thought him rough.

Another misfortune was, that he was a bachelor.  Ladies think, and I,
for one, think that ladies are quite right in so thinking, that doctors
should be married men.  All the world feels that a man when married
acquires some of the attributes of the old woman--he becomes, to a
certain extent, a motherly sort of being; he acquires a conversance 
with women's ways and women's wants, and loses the wilder and offensive
sparks of his virility.  It must be easier to talk to such a one about
Matilda's stomach, and the growing pains in Fanny's legs, than to a
young bachelor.  This impediment also stood much in Dr Thorne's way
during his first years at Greshamsbury.

But his wants were not at first great; and though his ambition was
perhaps high, it was not of an impatient nature. The world was his
oyster; but, circumstanced as he was, he knew that it was not for him
to open it with his lancet all at once.  He had bread to earn, which he
must earn wearily; he had a character to make, which must come slowly;
it satisfied his soul, that in addition to his immortal hopes, he had a
possible future in this world to which he could look forward with clear
eyes, and advance with his heart that would know no fainting.

On his first arrival at Greshamsbury he had been put by the squire into
a house, which he still occupied when that squire's grandson came of
age.  There were two decent, commodious, private houses in the
village--always excepting the rectory, which stood grandly in its own
grounds, and, therefore, was considered as ranking above the village 
residences--of these two Dr Thorne had the smaller.  They stood exactly
at the angle before described, on the outer side of it, and at right
angles to each other.  They possessed good stables and ample gardens;
and it may be as well to specify, that Mr Umbleby, the agent and lawyer
to the estate, occupied the larger one.

Here Dr Thorne lived for eleven or twelve years, all alone; and then
for ten or eleven more with his niece, Mary Thorne. Mary was thirteen
when she came to take up permanent abode as mistress of the
establishment--or, at any rate, to act as the only mistress which the
establishment possessed.  This advent greatly changed the tenor of the
doctor's ways.  He had been before pure bachelor; not a room in his
house had been comfortably furnished; he at first commenced in a 
makeshift sort of way, because he had not at his command the means of
commencing otherwise; and he had gone on in the same fashion, because
the exact time had never come at which it was imperative in him to set
his house in order.  He had had no fixed hour for his meals, no fixed
place for his books, no fixed wardrobe for his clothes.  He had a few
bottles of good wine in his cellar, and occasionally asked a brother
bachelor to take a chop with him; but beyond this he had touched very 
little on the cares of housekeeping.  A slop-bowl full of strong tea,
together with bread, and butter, and eggs, was produced for him in the
morning, and he expected that at whatever hour he might arrive in the
evening, some food should be presented to him wherewith to satisfy the
cravings of nature; if, in addition to this, he had another slop-bowl 
of tea in the evening, he got all that he ever required, or all, at
least, that he ever demanded.

But when Mary came, or rather, when she was about to come, things were
altogether changed at the doctor's.  People had hitherto wondered--and
especially Mrs Umbleby--how a gentleman like Dr Thorne could continue
to live in so slovenly a manner; and how people again wondered, and
again especially Mrs Umbleby, how the doctor could possibly think it
necessary to put such a lot of furniture into a house because a little
chit of a girl of twelve years was coming to live with him.

Mrs Umbleby had great scope for her wonder.  The doctor made a thorough
revolution in his household, and furnished his house from the ground to
the roof completely.  He painted--for the first time since the
commencement of his tenancy--he papered, he carpeted, as though a Mrs
Thorne with a good fortune were coming home to-morrow; and all for a
girl of twelve years old.  'And now,' said Mrs Umbleby, to her friend 
Miss Gushi