ng, 'how did he find out what to buy?' as though the doctor
had been brought up like a wild beast, ignorant of the nature of tables
and chairs, and with no more developed ideas of drawing-room drapery
than an hippopotamus.

To the utter amazement of Mrs Umbleby and Miss Gushing, the doctor did
it very well.  He said nothing about it to any one--he never did say
much about such things--but he furnished his house well and discreetly;
and when Mary Thorne came home from her school at Bath, to which she
had been taken some six years previously, she found herself called upon
to be the presiding genius of a perfect paradise.

It has been said that the doctor had managed to endear himself to the
new squire before the old squire's death, and that, therefore, the
change at Greshamsbury had had no professional ill effects upon him. 
Such was the case at the time; but, nevertheless, all did not go
smoothly in the Greshamsbury medical department.  There was six or
seven years' difference in age between Mr Gresham and the doctor, and
moreover, Mr Gresham was young for his age, and the doctor old; but,
nevertheless, there was a very close attachment between them early in
life.  This was never thoroughly sundered, and, backed by this the
doctor did maintain himself for some years before the artillery of Lady
Arabella's artillery.  But drops falling, if they fall constantly, will
bore through a stone.

Dr Thorne's pretensions, mixed with his subversive professional
democratic tendencies, his seven-and-sixpenny visits, added to his utter
disregard of Lady Arabella's airs, were too much for her spirit. He
brought Frank through his first troubles, and that at first ingratiated
her; he was equally successful with the early dietary of Augusta and
Beatrice; but, as his success was obtained in direct opposition to the
Courcy Castle nursery principles, this hardly did much in his favour.
When the third daughter was born, he at once declared that she was a
very weakly flower, and sternly forbade the mother to go to London. The
mother, loving her babe, obeyed; but did not the less hate the doctor
for the order, which she firmly believed was given at the instance and
express dictation of Mr Gresham. Then another little girl came into the
world, and the doctor was more imperative than ever as to the nursery
rules and the excellence of country air. Quarrels were thus engendered,
and Lady Arabella was taught to believe that this doctor of her
husband's was after all no Solomon. In her husband's absence she sent
for Dr Fillgrave, giving very express intimation that he would not have
to wound either his eyes or dignity by encountering his enemy; and she
found Dr Fillgrave a great comfort to her.

Then Dr Thorne gave Mr Gresham to understand that, under such 
circumstances, he could not visit professionally at Greshamsbury any
longer.  The poor squire saw there was no help for it, and though he
maintained his friendly connexion with his neighbour, the
seven-and-sixpenny visits were at an end.  Dr Fillgrave from
Barchester, and the gentleman at Silverbridge, divided the
responsibility between them, and the nursery principles of Courcy
Castle were again in vogue at Greshamsbury.

So things went on for years, and those years were years of sorrow.  We
must not ascribe to our doctor's enemies the sufferings and sickness,
and deaths that occurred.  The four frail little ones that died would
probably have been taken had Lady Arabella been more tolerant of Dr
Thorne.  But the fact was, that they did die; and that the mother's
heart then got the better of the woman's pride, and Lady Arabella 
humbled herself before Dr Thorne.  She humbled herself, or would have
done so, had the doctor permitted her.  But he, with his eyes full of
tears, stopped the utterance of her apology, took her two hands in his,
pressed them warmly, and assured her that his joy in returning would be
great, for the love that he bore to all that belonged to Greshamsbury. 
And so the seven-and-sixpenny visits were recommenced; and the great
triumph of Dr Fillgrave came to an end.

Great was the joy in the Greshamsbury nursery when the second change
took place.  Among the doctor's attributes, not hitherto mentioned, was
an aptitude for the society of children.  He delighted to talk to
children, and to play with them.  He would carry them on his back,
three or four at a time, roll with them on the ground, race with them
in the garden, invent games for them, contrive amusements in 
circumstances which seemed quite adverse to all manner of delight; and,
above all, his physic was not nearly so nasty as that which came from
Silverbridge.

He had a great theory as to the happiness of children; and though he
was not disposed altogether to throw over the precepts of
Solomon--always bargaining that he should, under no circumstances, be
himself the executioner--he argued that the principal duty which a
parent owed to a child was to make him happy.  Not only was the man to
be made happy--the future man, if that might be possible--but the
existing boy was to be treated with equal favour; and his happiness, so
said the doctor, was of much easier attainment.

'Why struggle after future advantage at the expense of the present
pain, seeing that the results were so very doubtful?' 

Many an opponent of the doctor had thought to catch him on the hip when
so singular a doctrine was broached; but they were not always
successful.  'What!' said his sensible enemies, 'is Johnny not to be
taught to read because he does not like it?' 'Johnny must read by all
means,' would the doctor answer; 'but is it necessary that he should
not like it?  If the preceptor have it in him, may not Johnny learn not
only to read, but to like to learn to read?'

'But,' would say his enemies, 'children must be controlled.' 

'And so must men also,' would say the doctor.  'I must not steal your
peaches, nor make love to your wife, nor libel your character.  Much as
I might wish through my natural depravity to indulge in such vices, I
am debarred from them without pain, and I may almost say without
unhappiness.'

And so the argument went on, neither party convincing the other.  But,
in the meantime, the children of the neighbourhood became very fond of
Dr Thorne.

Dr Thorne and the squire were still fast friends, but circumstances had
occurred, spreading themselves now over a period of many years, which
almost made the poor squire uneasy in the doctor's company.  Mr Gresham
owed a large sum of money, and he had, moreover, already sold a portion
of his property. Unfortunately it had been the pride of the Greshams 
that their acres had descended from one another without an entail, so
that each possessor of Greshamsbury had had the full power to dispose
of the property as he pleased.  Any doubt as to its going to the male
heir had never hitherto been felt.  It had occasionally been encumbered
by charges for younger children; but these charges had been liquidated,
and the property had come down without any burden to the present
squire.  Now a portion of this land had been sold, and it had been sold
to a certain degree through the agency of Dr Thorne.

This made the squire an unhappy man.  No man loved his family name and
honour, his old family blazon and standing more thoroughly than he did;
he was every whit a Gresham at heart; but his spirit had been weaker
than that of his forefathers; and, in his days, for the first time, the
Greshams were going to the wall!  Ten years before the beginning of our
story it had been necessary to raise a large sum of money to meet and 
pay off pressing liabilities, and it was found that this could be done
with more material advantage by selling a portion of the property than
in any other way.  A portion of it, about a third of the whole in
value, was accordingly sold. 

Boxall Hill lay half between Greshamsbury and Barchester, and was known
as having the best partridge shooting in the county; as having on it
also a celebrated fox cover, Boxall Gorse, held in very high repute by
Barsetshire sportsmen.  There was no residence on the immediate estate,
and it was altogether divided from the remained of the Greshamsbury 
property.  This, with many inward and outward groans, Mr Gresham
permitted to be sold.

It was sold, and sold well, by private contract to a native of
Barchester, who, having risen from the world's ranks, had made for
himself great wealth.  Somewhat of this man's character must hereafter
be told; it will suffice to say that he relied for advice in money
matters upon Dr Thorne, and that at Dr Thorne's suggestion he had
purchased Boxall Hill, partridge-shooting and gorse cover all
included.  He had not only bought Boxall Hill, but had subsequently
lent the squire large sums of money on mortgage, in all which
transactions the doctor had taken part.  It had therefore come to pass 
that Mr Gresham was not infrequently called upon to discuss his money
affairs with Dr Thorne, and occasionally to submit to lectures and
advice which might perhaps as well have been omitted.

So much for Dr Thorne.  A few words must still be said about Miss Mary
Thorne before we rush into our story; the crust will then have been
broken, and the pie will be open to the guests. Little Miss Mary was
kept at a farm-house till she was six; she was then sent to school at
Bath, and transplanted to the doctor's newly furnished house, a little 
more than six years after that.  It must not be supposed that he had
lost sight of his charge during her earlier years.  He was much too
well aware of the nature of the promise which he had made to the
departing mother to do that.  He had constantly visited his little
niece, and long before the first twelve years of her life were over had
lost consciousness of his promise, and of his duty to the mother, in
the stronger ties of downright personal love for the only creature that
belonged to him.

When Mary came home the doctor was like a child in his glee. He
prepared surprises for her with as much forethought and trouble as
though he were contriving mines to blow up an enemy. He took her first
into the shop, and then into the kitchen, thence to the dining-rooms,
after that to his and her bedrooms, and so on till he came to the full
glory of the new drawing-room, enhancing the pleasure by little jokes,
and telling her that he should never dare to come into the last 
paradise without her permission, and not then till he had taken off his
boots.  Child as she was, she understood the joke, and carried it on
like a little queen; and so they soon became the firmest of friends.

But though Mary was queen, it was still necessary that she should be
educated.  Those were the earlier days in which Lady Arabella had
humbled herself, and to show her humility she invited Mary to share the
music-lessons of Augusta and Beatrice at the great house.  A
music-master from Barchester came over three times a week, and remained
for three hours, and if the doctor chose to send his girl over, she
could pick up what was going on without doing any harm.  So said the 
Lady Arabella.  The doctor with many thanks and with no hesitation,
accepted the offer, merely adding, that he had perhaps better settle
separately with Signor Cantabili, the music-master.  He was very much
obliged to Lady Arabella for giving his little girl permission to join
her lessons to those of the Miss Greshams.

It need hardly be said that the Lady Arabella was on fire at once. 
Settle with Signor Cantabili!  No, indeed; she would do that; there
must be no expense whatever incurred in such an arrangement on Miss
Thorne's account!  But here, as in most things, the doctor carried his
point.  It being the time of the lady's humility, she could not make as
good a fight as she would otherwise have done; and thus she found, to
her great disgust, that Mary Thorne was learning music in her 
schoolroom on equal terms, as regarded payment, with her own 
daughters.  The arrangement having been made could not be broken,
especially as the young lady in nowise made herself disagreeable; and
more especially as the Miss Greshams themselves were very fond of her.

And so Mary Thorne learnt music at Greshamsbury, and with her music she
learnt other things also; how to behave herself among girls of her own
age; how to speak and talk as other young ladies do; how to dress
herself, and how to move and walk.  All which, she being quick to learn
without trouble at the great house.  Something also she learnt of
French, seeing that the Greshamsbury French governess was always in the
room.

And then some few years later, there came a rector, and a rector's
sister; and with the latter Mary studied German and French also.  From
the doctor himself she learnt much; the choice, namely, of English
books for her own reading, and habits of thought somewhat akin to his
own, though modified by the feminine softness of her individual mind. 

And so Mary Thorne grew up and was educated.  Of her personal 
appearance it certainly is my business as an author to say something. 
She is my heroine, and, as such, must necessarily be very beautiful;
but, in truth, her mind and inner qualities are more clearly distinct
to my brain than her outward form and features.  I know that she was
far from being tall, and far from being showy; that her feet and hands 
were small and delicate; that her eyes were bright when looked at, but
not brilliant so as to make their brilliancy palpably visible to all
around her; her hair was dark brown, and worn very plainly brushed from
her forehead; her lips were thin, and her mouth, perhaps, in general
inexpressive, but when she was eager in conversation it would show
itself to be animated with curves of wondrous energy; and, quiet as she
was in manner, sober and demure as was her usual settled appearance,
she could talk, when the fit came on her, with an energy which in truth
surprised those who did not know her; aye, and sometimes those who
did.  Energy!  nay, it was occasionally a concentration of passion,
which left her for the moment perfectly unconscious of all other cares
but solicitude for that subject which she might then be advocating.

All her friends, including the doctor, had at times been made unhappy
by this vehemence of character; but yet it was to that very vehemence
that she owed it that all her friends loved her.  It had once nearly
banished her in early years from the Greshamsbury schoolroom; and yet
it ended in making her claim to remain there so strong, that Lady
Arabella could no longer oppose it, even when she had the wish to do
so.

A new French governess had lately come to Greshamsbury, and was, or was
to be, a great pet with Lady Arabella, having all the great gifts with
which a governess can be endowed, and being also a protege from the
castle. The castle, in Greshamsbury parlance, always meant that of
Courcy.  Soon after this a valued little locket belonging to Augusta 
Gresham was missing.  The French governess had objected to its being
worn in the schoolroom, and it had been sent up to the bedroom by a
young servant-girl, the daughter of a small farmer on the estate.  The
locket was missing, and after a while, a considerable noise in the
matter having been made, was found, by the diligence of the governess,
somewhere among the belongings of the English servant.  Great was the
anger of Lady Arabella, loud were the protestations of the girl, mute
the woe of her father, piteous the tears of her mother, inexorable the
judgment of the Greshamsbury world.  But something occurred, it matters
now not what, to separate Mary Thorne in opinion from that world at
large.  Out she then spoke, and to her face accused the governess of
the robbery. For two days Mary was in disgrace almost as deep as that
of the farmer's daughter.  But she was neither quiet or dumb in her
disgrace.  When Lady Arabella would not hear her, she went to Mr
Gresham.  She forced her uncle to move in the matter.  She gained over
to her side, one by one, the potentates of the parish, and ended by
bringing Mam'selle Larron down on her knees with a confession of the
facts.  From that time Mary Thorne was dear to the tenantry of 
Greshamsbury; and specially dear to one small household, where a
rough-spoken father of a family was often heard to declare, that for
Miss Mary Thorne he'd face man or magistrate, duke or devil.

And so Mary Thorne grew up under the doctor's eye, and at the beginning
of our tale she was one of the guests assembled at Greshamsbury on the
coming of age of the heir, she herself having then arrived at the same
period of her life.



CHAPTER IV

LESSONS FROM COURCY CASTLE

It was the first of July, young Frank Gresham's birthday, and the
London season was not yet over; nevertheless, Lady de Courcy had
managed to get down into the country to grace the coming of age of the
heir, bringing with her all the Ladies Amelia, Rosina, Margaretta, and
Alexandrina, together with such of the Honourable Johns and Georges as
could be collected for the occasion.

The Lady Arabella had contrived this year to spend ten weeks in town,
which, by a little stretching, she made to pass for the season; and had
managed, moreover, at last to refurnish, not ingloriously, the Portman
Square drawing-room.  She had gone up to London under the pretext,
imperatively urged, of Augusta's teeth--young ladies' teeth are not
infrequently of value in this way;--and having received authority for a
new carpet, which was really much wanted, had made such dexterous use
of that sanction as to run up an upholsterer's bill of six or seven
hundred pounds.  She had of course had her carriage and horses; the
girls of course had gone out; it had been positively necessary to have
a few friends in Portman Square; and, altogether, the ten weeks had not
been unpleasant, and not inexpensive.

For a few confidential minutes before dinner, Lady de Courcy and her
sister-in-law sate together in the latter's dressing-room, discussing
the unreasonableness of the squire, who had expressed himself with more
than ordinary bitterness as to the folly--he had probably used some
stronger word--of these London proceedings.

'Heavens!,' said the countess, with much eager animation; 'what can the
man expect?  What does he wish you to do?'

'He would like to sell the house in London, and bury us all here for
ever.  Mind, I was there only for ten weeks.'

'Barely time for the girls to get their teeth properly looked at!  But
Arabella, what does he say?'  Lady de Courcy was very anxious to learn
the exact truth of the matter, and ascertain, if she could, whether Mr
Gresham was really as poor as he pretended to be.

'Why, he said yesterday that he would have no more going to town at
all; that he was barely able to pay the claims made on him, and keep up
the house here, and that he would not--'

'Would not what?' asked the countess.

'Why, he said that he would not utterly ruin poor Frank.'

'Ruin Frank!'

'That's what he said.'

'But, surely, Arabella, it is not so bad as that?  What possible reason
can there be for him to be in debt?'

'He is always talking of those elections.'

'But, my dear, Boxall Hill paid all that off.  Of course Frank will not
have such an income as there was when you married into the family; we
all know that.  And whom will he have to thank but his father?  But
Boxall Hill paid all those debts, and why should there be any
difficulty now?'

'It was those nasty dogs, Rosina,' said the Lady Arabella.

'Well, I for one never approved of the hounds coming to Greshamsbury. 
When a man has once involved his property he should not incur any
expenses that are not absolutely necessary.  That is a golden rule
which Mr Gresham ought to have remembered.  Indeed, I put it to him
nearly in those very words; but Mr Gresham never did, and never will
receive with common civility anything that comes from me.'

'I know, Rosina, he never did; and yet where would he have been but for
the De Courcys?'  So exclaimed, in her gratitude, the Lady Arabella; to
speak the truth, however, but for the De Courcys, Mr Gresham might have
been at this moment on the top of Boxall Hill, monarch of all he
surveyed.

'As I was saying,' continued the countess, 'I never approved of the
hounds coming to Greshamsbury; but yet, my dear, the hounds can't have
eaten up everything.  A man with ten thousand a year ought to be able
to keep hounds; particularly as he had a subscription.'

'He says the subscription was little or nothing.'

'That's nonsense, my dear.  Now, Arabella, what does he do with his
money?  That's the question.  Does he gamble?'

'Well,' said Lady Arabella, very slowly, 'I don't think he does.'  If
the squire did gamble he must have done it very slyly, for he rarely
went away from Greshamsbury, and certainly very few men looking like
gamblers were in the habit of coming thither as guests.  'I don't think
he does gamble.'  Lady Arabella put her emphasis on the word gamble, as
though her husband, if he might perhaps be charitably acquitted of that
vice, was certainly guilty of every other known in the civilized world.

'I know he used,' said Lady de Courcy, looking very wise, and rather
suspicious.  She certainly had sufficient domestic reasons for
disliking the propensity; 'I know he used; and when a man begins, he is
hardly ever cured.'

'Well, if he does, I don't know it,' said the Lady Arabella.

'The money, my dear, must go somewhere.  What excuse does he give when
you tell him you want this and that--all the common necessaries of
life, that you have always been used to?'

'He gives no excuse; sometimes he says the family is so large.'

'Nonsense!  Girls cost nothing; there's only Frank, and he can't have
cost anything yet.  Can he be saving money to buy back Boxall Hill?'

'Oh no!' said the Lady Arabella, quickly.  'He is not saving anything;
he never did, and never will save, though he is so stingy to me.  He is
hard pushed for money, I know that.'

'Then where has it gone?' said the Countess de Courcy, with a look of
stern decision.

'Heaven only knows!  Now, Augusta is to be married.  I must of course
have a few hundred pounds.  You should have heard how he groaned when I
asked him for it.  Heaven only knows where the money goes!'  And the
injured wife wiped a piteous tear from her eye with her fine dress
cambric handkerchief.  'I have all the sufferings and privations of a
poor man's wife, but I have none of the consolations.  He has no 
confidence in me; he never tells me anything; he never talks to me
about his affairs.  If he talks to any one it is to that horrid
doctor.'

'What, Dr Thorne?'  Now the Countess de Courcy hated Dr Thorne with a
holy hatred.

'Yes; Dr Thorne.  I believe that he knows everything; and advises
everything, too.  Whatever difficulties poor Gresham may have, I do
believe Dr Thorne has brought them about.  I do believe it, Rosina.'

'Well, that is surprising.  Mr Gresham with all his faults is a
gentleman; and how he can talk about his affairs with a low apothecary
like that I, for one, cannot imagine.  Lord de Courcy has not always
been to me all that he should have been; far from it.'  And Lady de
Courcy thought over in her mind injuries of a much graver description
than any that her sister-in-law had ever suffered; 'but I have never
known anything like that at Courcy Castle.  Surely Umbleby knows all
about it, doesn't he?'

'Not half so much as the doctor,' said Lady Arabella.

The countess shook her head slowly; the idea of Mr Gresham, a country
gentleman of good estate like him, making a confidant of a country
doctor was too great a shock for her nerves; and for a while she was
constrained to sit silent before she could recover herself.

'One thing at any rate is certain, Arabella,' said the countess, as
soon as she found herself again sufficiently composed to offer counsel
in a properly dictatorial manner.  'One thing at any rate is certain;
if Mr Gresham be involved so deeply as you say, Frank has but only one
duty before him. He must marry money.  The heir of fourteen thousand a
year may indulge himself in looking for blood, as Mr Gresham did, my
dear'--it must be understood that there was very little compliment in
this, as the Lady Arabella had always conceived herself to be a
beauty--'or for beauty, as some men do,' continued the countess,
thinking of the choice that the present Earl de Courcy had made; 'but
Frank must marry money. I hope he will understand this early; do make
him understand this before he makes a fool of himself: when a man
thoroughly understands this, when he knows what his circumstances 
require, why, the matter becomes easy to him.  I hope that Frank
understands that he has no alternative.  In his position he must marry
money.'

But, alas!  alas!  Frank Gresham had already made a fool of himself.

'Well, my boy, I wish you joy with all my heart,' said the Honourable
John, slapping his cousin on the back, as he walked round to the
stable-yard with him before dinner, to inspect a setter puppy of
peculiarly fine breed which had been sent to Frank as a birthday
present.  'I wish I were an elder son; but we can't all have that
luck.'

'Who wouldn't sooner be the younger son of an earl than the eldest son
of a plain squire?' said Frank, wishing to say something civil in
return for his cousin's civility.

'I wouldn't for one,' said the Honourable John.  'What chance have I? 
There's Porlock as strong as a horse; and then George comes next.  And
the governor's good for these twenty years.'  And the young man sighed
as he reflected what small hope there was that all those who were
nearest and dearest to him should die out of his way, and leave him to
the sweet enjoyment of an earl's coronet and fortune.  'Now, you're 
sure of your game some day; and as you've no brothers, I suppose the
squire'll let you do pretty well what you like.  Besides, he's not so
strong as my governor, though he's younger.'

Frank had never looked at his fortune in this light before, and was so
slow and green that he was not much delighted at the prospect now that
it was offered to him.  He had always, however, been taught to look to
his cousins, the De Courcys, as men with whom it would be very
expedient that he should be intimate; he therefore showed no offence,
but changed the conversation.

'Shall you hunt with the Barsetshire this season, John?  I hope you
will; I shall.'

'Well, I don't know.  It's very slow.  It's all tillage here, or else
woodland.  I rather fancy I shall go to Leicestershire when the
partridge-shooting is over.  What sort of a lot do you mean to come out
with, Frank?'

Frank became a little red as he answered, 'Oh, I shall have two,' he
said; 'that is, the mare I have had these two years, and the horse my
father gave me this morning.'

'What!  only those two?  and the mare is nothing more than a pony.'

'She is fifteen hands,' said Frank, offended.

'Well, Frank, I certainly would not stand that,' said the Honourable
John.  'What, go out before the county with one untrained horse and a
pony; and you the heir to Greshamsbury!'

'I'll have him trained before November,' said Frank, 'that nothing in
Barsetshire will stop him.  Peter says'--Peter was the Greshamsbury
stud-groom--'that he tucks up his legs beautifully.'

'But who the deuce would think of going to work with one horse; or two
either, if you insist on calling the old pony a huntress?  I'll put you
up to a trick, my lad: if you stand that you'll stand anything; and if
you don't mean to go in leading-strings all your life, now is the time
to show it.  There's young Baker--Harry Baker, you know--he came of age
last year, and he has as pretty a string of nags as any one would wish
to set eyes on; four hunters and a hack.  Now, if old Baker has four
thousand a year it's every shilling he has got.'

This was true, and Frank Gresham, who in the morning had been made so
happy by his father's present of a horse, began to feel that hardly
enough had been done for him.  It was true that Mr Baker had only four
thousand a year; but it was also true that he had no other child than
Harry Baker; that he had no great establishment to keep up; that he
owed a shilling to no one; and, also, that he was a great fool in
encouraging a mere boy to ape all the caprices of a man of wealth.  
Nevertheless, for a moment, Frank Gresham did feel that, considering
his position, he was being treated rather unworthily. 

'Take the matter in your own hands, Frank,' said the Honourable John,
seeing the impression that he had made.  'Of course the governor knows
very well that you won't put up with such a stable as that.  Lord bless
you!  I have heard that when he married my aunt, and that was when he
was about your age, he had the best stud in the whole county; and then 
he was in Parliament before he was three-and-twenty.'

'His father, you know, died when he was very young,' said Frank.

'Yes; I know he had a stroke of luck that doesn't fall to everyone;
but--'

Young Frank's face grew dark now instead of red.  When his cousin
submitted to him the necessity of having more than two horses for his
own use he could listen to him; but when the same monitor talked of the
chance of a father's death as a stroke of luck, Frank was too much
disgusted to be able pass it over with indifference.  What!  was he
thus to think of his father, whose face was always lighted up with
pleasure when his boy came near to him, and so rarely bright at any 
other time? Frank had watched his father closely enough to be aware of
this; he knew how his father delighted in him; he had had cause to
guess that his father had many troubles, and that he strove hard to
banish the memory of them when his son was with him.  He loved his
father truly, purely, and thoroughly, liked to be with him, and would
be proud to be his confidant.  Could he listen quietly while his cousin
spoke of the chance of his father's death as a stroke of luck?

'I shouldn't think it a stroke of luck, John.  I should think it the
greatest misfortune in the world.'

It is so difficult for a young man to enumerate sententiously a
principle of morality, or even an expression of ordinary good feeling,
without giving himself something of a ridiculous air, without assuming
something of a mock grandeur!

'Oh, of course, my dear fellow,' said the Honourable John, laughing;
'that's a matter of course.  We all understand that without saying it. 
Porlock, of course, would feel exactly the same about the governor; but
if the governor were to walk, I think Porlock would console himself
with the thirty thousand a year.'

'I don't know what Porlock would do; he's always quarrelling with my
uncle, I know.  I only spoke of myself; I never quarrelled with my
father, and I hope I never shall.'

'All right, my lad of wax, all right.  I dare say you won't be tried;
but it you are, you'll find before six months are over, that it's a
very nice thing to master of Greshamsbury.'

'I'm sure I shouldn't find anything of the kind.'

'Very well, so be it.  You wouldn't do as young Hatherly did, at
Hatherly Court, in Gloucestershire, when his father kicked the bucket.
You know Hatherly, don't you?'

'No; I never saw him.'

'He's Sir Frederick now, and has, or had, one of the finest fortunes in
England, for a commoner; the most of it is gone now.  Well, when he
heard of his governor's death, he was in Paris, but he went off to
Hatherly as fast as special train and post-horses would carry him, and
got there just in time for the funeral.  As he came back to Hatherly
Court from the church, they were putting up the hatchment over the
door, and Master Fred saw that the undertakers had put at the bottom 
"Resurgam". You know what that means?'

'Oh, yes,' said Frank.

'"I'll come back again."' said the Honourable John, construing the
Latin for the benefit of his cousin.  '"NO," said Fred Hatherly,
looking up at the hatchment; "I'm blessed if you do, old gentleman. 
That would be too much of a joke; I'll take care of that."  So he got
up at night, and he got some fellows with him, and they climbed up and
painted out "Resurgam", and they painted into its place, "Requiescat in
pace"; which means, you know, "you'd a great deal better stay where you
are".  Now I call that good.  Fred Hatherly did that as sure as--as sure
as--as sure as anything.'

Frank could not help laughing at the story, especially at his cousin's
mode of translating the undertaker's mottoes; and then they sauntered
back from the stables into the house to dress for dinner.

Dr Thorne had come to the house somewhat before dinner-time, at Mr
Gresham's request, and was now sitting with the squire in his own
book-room--so called--while Mary was talking to some of the girls
upstairs.

'I must have ten or twelve thousand pounds; ten at the very least,'
said the squire, who was sitting in his usual arm-chair, close to his
littered table, with his head supported on his hand, looking very
unlike the father of an heir of a noble property, who had that day come
of age.

It was the first of July, and of course there was no fire in the grate;
but, nevertheless, the doctor was standing with his back to the
fireplace, with his coat-tails over his arms, as though he were
engaged, now in summer as he so often was in winter, in talking, and
roasting his hinder person at the same time.

'Twelve thousand pounds!  It's a very large sum of money.'

'I said ten,' said the squire.

'Ten thousand pounds is a very large sum of money.  There is no doubt
he'll let you have it.  Scatcherd will let you have it; but I know
he'll expect to have the title deeds.'

'What!  for ten thousand pounds?' said the squire.  'There is not a
registered debt against the property but his own and Armstrong's.'

'But his own is very large already.'

'Armstrong's is nothing; about four-and-twenty thousand pounds.'

'Yes; but he comes first, Mr Gresham.'

'Well, what of that?  To hear you talk, one would think that there was
nothing left of Greshamsbury.  What's four-and-twenty thousand
pounds?  Does Scatcherd know what rent-roll is?'

'Oh, yes, he knows it well enough: I wish he did not.'

'What he means is, that he must have ample security to cover what he
has already advanced before he goes on.  I wish to goodness you had no
further need to borrow.  I did think that things were settled last
year.'

'Oh if there's any difficulty, Umbleby will get it for me.'

'Yes; and what will you have to pay for it?'

'I'd sooner pay double that be talked to in this way,' said the squire,
angrily, and, as he spoke, he got up hurriedly from his chair, thrust
his hands into his trousers-pockets, walked quickly to the window, and
immediately walking back again, threw himself once more into his chair.

'There are some things a man cannot bear, doctor,' said he, beating the
devil's tattoo on the floor with one of his feet, 'though God knows I
ought to be patient now, for I am made to bear a good many things.  You
had better tell Scatcherd that I am obliged to him for his offer, but
that I will not trouble him.'

The doctor during this little outburst had stood quite silent with his
back to the fireplace and his coat-tails hanging over his arms; but
though his voice said nothing, his face said much.  He was very
unhappy; he was greatly grieved to find that the squire was so soon
again in want of money, and greatly grieved also to find that this want
had made him so bitter and unjust.  Mr Gresham had attacked him; but as
he was determined not to quarrel with Mr Gresham, he refrained from
answering.

The squire also remained silent for a few minutes; but he was not
endowed with the gift of silence, and was soon, as it were, compelled
to speak agaain.

'Poor Frank!' said he.  'I could yet be easy about everything if it
were not for the injury I have done him.  Poor Frank!'

The doctor advanced a few paces from off the rug, and taking his hand
out of his pocket, he laid it gently on the squire's shoulder.  'Frank
will do very well yet,' said the he.  'It is not absolutely necessary
that a man should have fourteen thousand pounds a year to be happy.'

'My father left me the property entire, and I should leave it entire to
my son;--but you don't understand this.'

The doctor did understand the feeling fully.  The fact, on the other
hand, was that, long as he had known him, the squire did not understand
the doctor.

'I would you could, Mr Gresham,' said the doctor, 'so that your mind
might be happier; but that cannot be, and, therefore, I say again, that
Frank will do very well yet, although he will not inherit fourteen
thousand pounds a year; and I would have you say the same thing to
yourself.'

'Ah!  you don't understand it,' persisted the squire.  'You don't know
how a man feels when he--Ah, well! it's no use my troubling you with
what cannot be mended.  I wonder whether Umbleby is about the place
anywhere?'

The doctor was again standing with his back against the chimney-piece,
and with his hands in his pockets.

'You did not see Umbleby as you came in?' again asked the squire.

'No, I did not; and if you will take my advice you will not see him
now; at any rate with reference to this money.'

'I tell you I must get it from someone; you say Scatcherd won't let me
have it.'

'No, Mr Gresham; I did not say that.'

'Well, you said what was as bad.  Augusta is to be married in 
September, and the money must be had.  I have agreed to give Moffat six
thousand pounds, and he is to have the money down in hard cash.'

'Six thousand pounds,' said the doctor.  'Well, I suppose that is not
more than your daughter should have.  But then, five times six are
thirty; thirty thousand pounds will be a large sum to make up.'

The father thought to himself that his younger girls were but children,
and that the trouble of arranging their marriage portions might well be
postponed a while.  Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

'That Moffat is a gripping, hungry fellow,'said the squire.  'I suppose
Augusta likes him; and, as regards money, it is a good match.'

'If Miss Gresham loves him, that is everything.  I am not in love with
him myself; but then, I am not a young lady.'

'The De Courcys are very fond of him.  Lady de Courcy says that he is a
perfect gentleman, and thought very much of in London.' 

'Oh!  if Lady de Courcy says that, of course, it's all right,' said the
doctor, with a quiet sarcasm, that was altogether thrown away on the
squire.

The squire did not like any of the De Courcys; especially, he did not
like Lady de Courcy; but still he was accessible to a certain amount of
gratification in the near connexion which he had with the earl and
countess; and when he wanted to support his family greatness, would
sometimes weakly fall back upon the grandeur of Courcy Castle.  It was
only when talking to his wife that he invariably snubbed the 
pretensions of his noble relatives.

The two men after this remained silent for a while; and then the
doctor, renewing the subject for which he had been summoned into the
book-room, remarked that as Scatcherd was now in the country--he did
not say, was now at Boxall Hill, as he did not wish to wound the
squire's ears--perhaps he had better go and see him, and ascertain in
what way this affair of the money might be arranged.  There was no
doubt, he said, that Scatcherd would supply the sum required at a lower
rate of interest than that which it could be procured through Umbleby's
means.

'Very well,' said the squire.  'I'll leave it in your hands, then.  I
think ten thousand pounds will do.  And now I'll dress for dinner.' And
then the doctor left him.

Perhaps the reader will suppose after this that the doctor had some
pecuniary interest of his own in arranging the squire's loans; or, at
any rate, he will think that the squire must have so thought.  Not in
the least; neither had he any such interest, nor did the squire think
that he had any.  What Dr Thorne did in this matter the squire well
knew was done for love.  But the squire of Greshamsbury was a great man
at Greshamsbury; and it behoved him to maintain the greatness of his
squirehood when discussing his affairs with the village doctor.  So
much he had at any rate learnt from his contact with the De Courcys.

And the doctor--proud, arrogant, contradictory, headstrong as he
was--why did he bear to be thus snubbed?  Because he knew that the
squire of Greshamsbury, when struggling with debt and poverty, required
an indulgence for his weakness.  Had Mr Gresham been in easy
circumstances, the doctor would by no means have stood so placidly with
his hands in his pockets, and have had Mr Umbleby thus thrown in his
teeth.  The doctor loved the squire, loved him as his own oldest 
friend; but he loved him ten times better as being in adversity than he
could ever done had things gone well at Greshamsbury in his time.

While this was going on downstairs, Mary was sitting upstairs with
Beatrice Gresham in the schoolroom.  The old schoolroom, so called, was
now a sitting-room, devoted to the use of the grown-up ladies of the
family, whereas one of the old nurseries was now the modern
schoolroom.  Mary well knew her way to the sanctum, and, without asking
any questions, walked up to it when her uncle went to the squire.  On
entering the room she found that Augusta and the Lady Alexandrina were 
also there, and she hesitated for a moment at the door.

'Come in, Mary,' said Beatrice, 'you know my cousin Alexandrina.' Mary
came in, and having shaken hands with her two friends, was bowing to
the lady, when the lady condescended, put out her noble hand, and
touched Miss Thorne's fingers.

Beatrice was Mary's friend, and many heart-burnings and much mental
solicitude did that young lady give to her mother by indulging in such
a friendship.  But Beatrice, with some faults, was true at heart, and
she persisted in loving Mary Thorne in spite of the hints which her
mother so frequently gave as to the impropriety of such an affection.

Nor had Augusta any objection to the society of Miss Thorne. Augusta
was a strong-minded girl, with much of the De Courcy arrogance, but
quite as well inclined to show it in opposition to her mother as in any
other form.  To her alone in the house did Lady Arabella show much
deference.  She was now going to make a suitable match with a man of
large fortune, who had been procured for her as an eligible parti by
her aunt, the countess.  She did not pretend, had never pretended, that
she loved Mr Moffat, but she knew, she said, that in the present state
of her father's affairs such a match was expedient.  Mr Moffat was a
young man of very large fortune, in Parliament, and inclined to
business, and in every way recommendable.  He was not a man of birth,
to be sure; that was to be lamented;--in confessing that Mr Moffat was
not a man of birth, Augusta did not go so far as to admit that he was
the son of a tailor; such, however, was the rigid truth in this
matter--he was not a man of birth, that was to be lamented; but in the
present state of affairs at Greshamsbury, she understood well that it
was her duty to postpone her own feelings in some respect.  Mr Moffat
would bring fortune; she would bring blood and connexion.  And as she
so said, her bosom glowed with strong pride to think that she would be
able to contribute so much more towards the proposed future partnership
than her husband would do.

'Twas thus that Miss Gresham spoke of her match to her dear friends, her
cousins the De Courcys for instance, to Miss Oriel, her sister
Beatrice, and even to Mary Thorne.  She had no enthusiasm, she
admitted, but she thought she had good judgment.  She thought she had
shown good judgment in accepting Mr Moffat's offer, though she did not
pretend to any romance of affection.  And, having so said, she went to 
work with considerable mental satisfaction, choosing furniture,
carriages, and clothes, not extravagantly as her mother would have
done, not in deference to sterner dictates of the latest fashion as her
aunt would have done, with none of the girlish glee in new purchases
which Beatrice would have felt, but with sound judgment.  She bought
things that were rich, for her husband was to be rich, and she meant to
avail herself of his wealth; she bought things that were fashionable,
for she meant to live in the fashionable world; but she bought what was
good, and strong, and lasting, and worth its money.

Augusta Gresham had perceived early in life that she could not obtain
success either as an heiress, or as a beauty, nor could she shine as a
wit; she therefore fell back on such qualities as she had, and
determined to win the world as a strong-minded, useful woman.  That
which she had of her own was blood; having that, she would in all ways
do what in her lay to enhance its value.  Had she not possessed it, it
would to her mind have been the vainest of pretences.

When Mary came in, the wedding preparations were being discussed.  The
number and names of the bridesmaids were being settled, the dresses
were on the tapis, the invitations to be given were talked over. 
Sensible as Augusta was, she was not above such feminine cares; she
was, indeed, rather anxious that the wedding should go off well.  She
was a little ashamed of her tailor's son, and therefore anxious that 
things should be as brilliant as possible.

The bridesmaid's names had just been written on a card as Mary entered
the room.  There were the Ladies Amelia, Rosina, Margaretta, and
Alexandrina of course at the head of it; then came Beatrice and the
twins; then Miss Oriel, who, though only a parson's sister, was a
person of note, birth and fortune.  After this there had been here a
great discussion whether or not there should be any more.  If there
were to be one more there must be two.  Now Miss Moffat had expressed a
direct wish, and Augusta, though she would much rather have done
without her, hardly knew how to refuse.  Alexandrina--we hope we may
be allowed to drop the 'lady' for the sake of brevity, for the present
scene only--was dead against such an unreasonable request.  'We none of
us know her, you know; and it would not be comfortable.'  Beatrice
strongly advocated the future sister-in-law's acceptance into the bevy;
she had her own reasons; she was pained that Mary Thorne should not be
among the number, and if Miss Moffat were accepted, perhaps Mary might
be brought in as her colleague.

'If you have Miss Moffat,' said Alexandrina, 'you must have dear Pussy
too; and I really think that Pussy is too young; it will be
troublesome.'  Pussy was the youngest Miss Gresham, who was now only
eight years old, and whose real name was Nina.

'Augusta,' said Beatrice, speaking with some slight hesitation, some
soupcon of doubt before the highest authority of her noble cousin, 'if
you do have Miss Moffat would you mind asking Mary Thorne to join her? 
I think Mary would like it, because, you see, Patience Oriel is to be
one; and we have known Mary much longer than we have known Patience.'

Then out and spake the Lady Alexandrina.

'Beatrice, dear, if you think of what you are asking, I am sure you
will see that it would not do; would not do at all. Miss Thorne is a
very nice girl, I am sure; and, indeed, what little I have seen of her
I highly approve.  But, after all, who is she?  Mamma, I know, thinks
that Aunt Arabella has been wrong to let be here so much, but--'

Beatrice became rather red in the face, and, in spite of the dignity of
her cousin, was preparing to defend her friend.

'Mind, I am not saying a word against Miss Thorne.'

'If I am married before her, she shall be one of my bridesmaids,' said
Beatrice.

'That will probably depend on circumstances,' said the Lady 
Alexandrina; I find that I cannot bring my courteous pen to drop the
title.  'But Augusta is very peculiarly situated.  Mr Moffat, is, you
see, not of the very highest birth; and, therefore, she should take
care that on her side every one about her is well born.'

'Then you cannot have Miss Moffat,' said Beatrice.

'No; I would not if I could help it,' said the cousin.

'But the Thornes are as good a family as the Greshams,' said Beatrice. 
She had not quite the courage to say, as good as the De Courcys.

'I dare say they are; and if this was Miss Thorne of Ullathorne,
Augusta probably would not object to her.  But can you tell me who Miss
Mary Thorne is?'

'She is Dr Thorne's niece.'

'You mean that she is called so; but do you know who her father was, or
who her mother was?  I, for one, must own that I do not.  Mamma, I
believe, does, but--'

At this moment the door opened gently and Mary Thorne entered the room.

It may easily be conceived, that while Mary was making her salutations
the three other young ladies were a little cast aback.  The Lady
Alexandrina, however, quickly recovered herself, and, by her inimitable
presence of mind and facile grace of manner, soon put the matter on a
proper footing.

'We were discussing Miss Gresham's marriage,' said she; 'I am sure I
may mention to an acquaintance of so long standing as Miss Thorne, that
the first of September has been now fixed for the wedding.'

Miss Gresham!  Acquaintance of so long standing!  Why, Mary and Augusta
Gresham had for years, we will hardly say for how many, passed their
mornings together in the same schoolroom; had quarrelled, and
squabbled, and caressed and kissed, and been all but sisters to each
other.  Acquaintance indeed!  Beatrice felt that her ears were
tingling, and even Augusta was a little ashamed.  Mary, however, knew
that the cold words had come from a De Courcy, and not from a Gresham,
and did not, therefore, resent them.

'So it's settled, Augusta, is it?' said she; 'the first of September. I
wish you joy with all my heart,' and, coming round, she put her arm
over Augusta's shoulder and kissed her. The Lady Alexandrina could not
but think that the doctor's niece uttered her congratulations very much
as though she were speaking to an equal; very much as though she had a
father and mother of her own.

'You will have delicious weather,' continued Mary.  'September, and the
beginning of October, is the nicest time of the year. If I were going
honeymooning it is just the time of year I would choose.'

'I wish you were, Mary,' said Beatrice.

'So do not I, dear, till I have found some decent sort of a body to
honeymoon along with me.  I won't stir out of Greshamsbury till I have
sent you off before me, at any rate. And where will you go, Augusta?'

'We have not settled that,' said Augusta.  'Mr Moffat talks of Paris.'

'Who ever heard of going to Paris in September?' said the Lady
Alexandrina.

The Lady Alexandrina was not pleased to find how completely the
doctor's niece took upon herself to talk, and sit, and act at
Greshamsbury as though she was on a par with the young ladies of the
family.  That Beatrice should have allowed this would not have
surprised her; but it was to be expected that Augusta would have shown
better judgment.

'These things require some tact in their management; some delicacy when
high interests are at stake,' said she; 'I agree with Miss Thorne in
thinking that, in ordinary circumstances, with ordinary people,
perhaps, the lady should have her way.  Rank, however, has its
drawbacks, Miss Thorne, as well as its privileges.'

'I should not object to the drawbacks,' said the doctor's niece,
'presuming them to be of some use; but I fear I might fail in getting
on so well with the privileges.'

The Lady Alexandrina looked at her as though not fully aware whether
she intended to be pert.  In truth, the Lady Alexandrina was rather in
the dark on the subject.  It was almost impossible, it was incredible,
that a fatherless, motherless, doctor's niece should be pert to an
earl's daughter at Greshamsbury, seeing that that earl's daughter was
the cousin of the miss Greshams.  And yet the Lady Alexandrina hardly
knew what other construction to put on the words she had just heard.

It was at any rate clear to her that it was not becoming that she
should just then stay any longer in that room.  Whether she intended to
be pert or not, Miss Mary Thorne was, to say the least, very free.  The
De Courcy ladies knew what was due to them--no ladies better; and,
therefore, the Lady Alexandrina made up her mind at once to go to her
own bedroom.

'Augusta,' she said, rising slowly from her chair with much stately
composure, 'it is nearly time 