to dress; will you come with me?  We have
a great deal to discuss, you know.'

So she swam out of the room, and Augusta, telling Mary that she would
see her again at dinner, swam--no, tried to swim--after her.  Miss
Gresham had had great advantages; but she had not been absolutely
brought up at Courcy Castle, and could not as yet quite assume the
Courcy style of swimming.

'There,' said Mary, as the door closed behind the rustling muslins of
the ladies.  'There, I have made an enemy for ever, perhaps two; that's
satisfactory.'

'And why have you done it, Mary?  When I am fighting your battles
behind your back, why do you come and upset it all by making the whole
family of the De Courcys dislike you?  In such a matter as that,
they'll all go together.'

'I am sure they will,' said Mary; 'whether they would be equally
unanimous in a case of love and charity, that, indeed, is another
question.'

'But why should you try to make my cousin angry; you that ought to have
so much sense?  Don't you remember that you were saying yourself the
other day, of the absurdity of combatting pretences which the world
sanctions?'

'I do, Trichy, I do; don't scold me now.  It is so much easier to
preach than to practise.  I do so wish I was a clergyman.'

'But you have done so much harm, Mary.'

'Have I?' said Mary, kneeling down on the ground at her friend's feet. 
'If I humble myself very low; if I kneel through the whole evening in a
corner; if I put my neck down and let all your cousins trample on it,
and then your aunt, would not that make atonement?  I would not object
to wearing sackcloth, either; and I'd eat a little ashes--or, at any 
rate, I'd try.'

'I know you're clever, Mary; but still I think you're a fool. I do,
indeed.'

'I am a fool, Trichy, I do confess it; and am not a bit clever; but
don't scold me; you see how humble I am; not only humble but umble,
which I look upon to be the comparative, or, indeed, superlative
degree.  Or perhaps there are four degrees; humble, umble, stumble,
tumble; and then, when one is absolutely in the dirt at their feet,
perhaps these big people won't wish one to stoop any further.'

'Oh, Mary!'

'And, oh, Trichy! you don't mean to say I mayn't speak out before you. 
There, perhaps you'd like to put your foot on my neck.'  And then she
put her head down to the footstool and kissed Beatrice's feet.

'I'd like, if I dared, to put my hand on your cheek and give you a good
slap for being such a goose.'

'Do; do, Trichy: you shall tread on me, or slap me, or kiss me;
whichever you like.'

'I can't tell you how vexed I am,' said Beatrice; 'I wanted to arrange
something.'

'Arrange something!  What? arrange what?  I love arranging.  I fancy
myself qualified to be an arranger-general in female matters.  I mean
pots and pans, and such like.  Of course I don't allude to
extraordinary people and extraordinary circumstances that require tact,
and delicacy, and drawbacks, and that sort of thing.'

'Very well, Mary.'

'But it's not very well; it's very bad if you look like that. Well, my
pet, there I won't.  I won't allude to the noble blood of your noble
relatives either in joke or in earnest.  What is it you want to
arrange, Trichy?'

'I want you to be one of Augusta's bridesmaids.'

'Good heavens, Beatrice!  Are you mad?  What!  Put me, even for a
morning, into the same category of finery as the noble blood from
Courcy Castle!'

'Patience is to be one.'

'But that is no reason why Impatience should be another, and I should
be very impatient under such honours.  No, Trichy; joking apart, do not
think of it.  Even if Augusta wished it I would refuse.  I should be
obliged to refuse.  I, too, suffer from pride; a pride quite as
unpardonable as that of others: I could not stand with your four
lady-cousins behind your sister at the altar.  In such a galaxy they
would be the stars and I--'

'Why, Mary, all the world knows that you are prettier than any of
them!'

'I am all the world's very humble servant.  But, Trichy, I should not
object if I were as ugly as the veiled prophet and they all as
beautiful as Zuleika.  The glory of that galaxy will be held to depend
not on its beauty; but on its birth.  You know how they would look at
me; now they would scorn me; and there, in church, at the altar, with
all that is solemn round us, I could not return their scorn as I might
do elsewhere.  In a room I'm not a bit afraid of them at all.'  And
Mary was again allowing herself to be absorbed by that feeling of
indomitable pride, of antagonism to the pride of others, which she
herself in her cooler moments was the first to blame.

'You often say, Mary, that that sort of arrogance should be despised
and passed over without notice.'

'So it should, Trichy.  I tell you that as a clergyman tells you to
hate riches.  But though the clergyman tells you so, he is not the less
anxious to be rich himself.'

'I particularly wish you to be one of Augusta's bridesmaids.'

'And I particularly wish to decline the honour; which honour has not
been, and will not be, offered to me.  No, Trichy.  I will not be
Augusta's bridesmaid, but--but--but--'

'But what, dearest?'

'But, Trichy, when some one else is married, when the new wing has been
built to a house that you know of--'

'Now, Mary, hold your tongue, or you know you'll make me angry.'

'I do so like to see you angry.  And when that time comes, when that
wedding does take place, then I will be a bridesmaid, Trichy. Yes! even
though I am not invited. Yes! though all the De Courcys in Barsetshire
should tread upon me and obliterate me. Though I should be dust among
the stars, though I should creep up in calico among their satins and
lace, I will nevertheless be there; close, close to the bride; to hold
something for her, to touch her dress, to feel that I am near to her,
to--to--to--' and she threw her arms round her companion, and kissed her
over and over again. 'No, Trichy; I won't be Augusta's bridesmaid; I'll
bide my time for bridesmaiding.'

What protestations Beatrice made against the probability of such an
event as foreshadowed in her friend's promise we will not repeat.  The
afternoon was advancing, and the ladies also had to dress for dinner,
to do honour to the young heir.



CHAPTER V

FRANK GRESHAM'S FIRST SPEECH

We have said, that over and above those assembled in the house, there
came to the Greshamsbury dinner on Frank's birthday the Jacksons of the
Grange, consisting of Mr and Mrs Jackson; the Batesons from Annesgrove,
viz., Mr and Mrs Bateson, and Miss Bateson, their daughter--an unmarried
lady of about fifty; the Bakers of Mill Hill, father and son; and Mr
Caleb Oriel, the rector, with his beautiful sister, Patience.  Dr
Thorne, and his niece Mary, we count among those already assembled at
Greshamsbury.

There was nothing very magnificent in the number of the guests thus
brought together to do honour to young Frank; but he, perhaps, was
called on to take a more prominent part in the proceedings, to be made
more of a hero than would have been the case had half the county been
there.  In that case the importance of the guests would have been so
great that Frank would have got off with a half-muttered speech or two;
but now he had to make a separate oration to every one, and very weary
work he found it.

The Batesons, Bakers, and Jacksons were very civil; no doubt the more
so from an unconscious feeling on their part, that as the squire was
known to a little out at elbows as regards money, any deficiency on
their part might be considered as owing to the present state of affairs
at Greshamsbury.  Fourteen thousand a year will receive honour; in that
case there is no doubt, and the man already possessing it is not apt to
be suspicious as to the treatment he may receive; but the ghost of
fourteen thousand a year is not always so self-assured.  Mr Baker,
with his moderate income, was a very much richer man than the squire;
and, therefore, he was peculiarly forward in congratulating Frank on
the brilliancy of his prospects.

Poor Frank had hardly anticipated what there would be to do, and before
dinner was announced he was very tired of it.  He had no warmer feeling
for any of the grand cousins than a very ordinary cousinly love; and he
had resolved, forgetful of birth and blood, and all those gigantic
considerations which now that manhood had come upon him, he was bound
always to bear in mind,--he had resolved to sneak out to dinner 
comfortably with Mary Thorne if possible; and if not with Mary, then
with his other love, Patience Oriel.

Great, therefore, was his consternation at finding that, after being
kept continually in the foreground for half an hour before dinner, he
had to walk out to the dining-room with his aunt the countess, and take
his father's place for the day at the bottom of the table.

'It will now depend altogether upon yourself, Frank, whether you
maintain or lose that high position in the county which has been held
by the Greshams for so many years,' said the countess, as she walked
through the spacious hall, resolving to lose no time in teaching to her
nephew that great lesson which it was so imperative that he should
learn.

Frank took this as an ordinary lecture, meant to inculcate general good
conduct, such as old bores of aunts are apt to inflict on youthful
victims in the shape of nephews and nieces.

'Yes,' said Frank; 'I suppose so; and I mean to go along all square,
aunt, and no mistake.  When I get back to Cambridge, I'll read like
bricks.'

His aunt did not care two straws about his reading.  It was not by
reading that the Greshams of Greshamsbury had held their heads up in 
the county, but by having high blood and plenty of money. The blood had
come naturally to this young man; but it behoved him to look for the
money in a great measure himself.  She, Lady de Courcy, could doubtless
help him; she might probably be able to fit him with a wife who would
bring her money onto his birth.  His reading was a matter in which she
could in no way assist him; whether his taste might lead him to prefer
books or pictures, or dogs and horses, or turnips in drills, or old
Italian plates and dishes, was a matter which did not much signify;
with which it was not at all necessary that his noble aunt should
trouble herself.

'Oh!  you are going to Cambridge again, are you?  Well, if your father
wishes it;--though very little is ever gained now by a university
connexion.'

'I am to take my degree in October, aunt; and I am determined, at any
rate, that I won't be plucked.'

'Plucked!'

'No; I won't be plucked.  Baker was plucked last year, and all because
he got into the wrong set at John's.  He's an excellent fellow if you
knew him.  He got among a set of men who did nothing but smoke and
drink beer.  Malthusians, we call them.'

'Malthusians!'

'"Malt", you know, aunt, and "use"; meaning that they drink beer.  So
poor Harry Baker got plucked.  I don't know that a fellow's any the
worse; however, I won't get plucked.'

By this time the party had taken their place round the long board, Mr
Gresham sitting at the top, in the place usually occupied by Lady
Arabella.  She, on the present occasion, sat next to her son on the one
side, as the countess did on the other.  If, therefore, Frank now went
astray, it would not be from want of proper leading.

'Aunt, will you have some beef?' said he, as soon as the soup and fish
had been disposed of, anxious to perform the rites of hospitality now
for the first time committed to his charge.

'Do not be in a hurry, Frank,' said his mother; 'the servants
will--'

'Oh! ah!   I forgot; there are cutlets and those sort of things.  My
hand is not yet in for this work, aunt.  Well, as I was saying about
Cambridge--' 

'Is Frank to go back to Cambridge, Arabella?' said the countess to her
sister-in-law, speaking across her nephew.

'So his father seems to say.'

'Is it not a waste of time?' asked the countess.

'You know I never interfere,' said the Lady Arabella; 'I never liked
the idea of Cambridge myself at all.  All the De Courcys were
Christchurch men; but the Greshams, it seems, were always at
Cambridge.'

'Would it not be better to send him abroad at once?'

'Much better, I would think,' said the Lady Arabella; 'but you know, I
never interfere: perhaps you would speak to Mr Gresham.'

The countess smiled grimly, and shook her head with a decidedly
negative shake.  Had she said out loud to the young man, 'Your father
is such an obstinate, pig-headed, ignorant fool, that it is no use
speaking to him; it would be wasting fragrance on the desert air,' she
could not have spoken more plainly.  The effect on Frank was this: that
he said to himself, speaking quite as plainly as Lady De Courcy had 
spoken by her shake of the face, 'My mother and aunt are always down on
the governor, always; but the more they are down on him the more I'll
stick to him.  I certainly will take my degree: I will read like
bricks; and I'll begin tomorrow.'

'Now will you take some beef, aunt?'  This was said out loud.

The Countess de Courcy was very anxious to go on with her lesson
without loss of time; but she could not, while surrounded by guests and
servants, enunciate the great secret: 'You must marry money, Frank;
that is your one great duty; that is the matter to be borne steadfastly
in your mind.'  She could not now, with sufficient weight and impress 
of emphasis, pour this wisdom into his ears; the more especially as he
was standing up to his work of carving, and was deep to his elbows in
horse-radish, fat and gravy.  So the countess sat silent while the
banquet proceeded.

'Beef, Harry?' shouted the young heir to his friend Baker.  'Oh!  but I
see it isn't your turn yet.  I beg your pardon, Miss Bateson,' and he
sent to that lady a pound and a half of excellent meat, cut out with
great energy in one slice, about half an inch thick.

And so the banquet went on.

Before dinner Frank had found himself obliged to make numerous small
speeches in answer to the numerous individual congratulations of his
friends; but these were as nothing to the one great accumulated onus of
an oration which he had long known that he should have to sustain after
the cloth was taken away.  Some one of course would propose his health,
and then there would be a clatter of voices, ladies and gentlemen, men
and girls; and when that was done he would find himself standing on his
legs, with the room about him, going round and round and round.

Having had a previous hint of this, he had sought advice from his
cousin, the Honourable George, whom he regarded as a dab at speaking;
at least, so he had heard the Honourable George say of himself.

'What the deuce is a fellow to say, George, when he stands up after the
clatter is done?'

'Oh, it's the easiest thing in life,' said the cousin.  'Only remember
this: you mustn't get astray; that is what they call presence of mind,
you know.  I'll tell you what I do, and I'm often called up, you know;
at our agriculturals I always propose the farmers' daughters: well,
what I do is this--I keep my eye steadfastly fixed on one of the
bottles, and never move it.'

'On one of the bottles!' said Frank; 'wouldn't it be better if I made a
mark of some old covey's head?  I don't like looking at the table.'

'The old covey'd move, and then you'd be done; besides thee isn't the
least use in the world in looking up.  I've heard people say, who go to
those sort of dinners every day of their lives, that whenever anything
witty is said; the fellow who says it is sure to be looking at the
mahogany.'

'Oh, you know I shan't say anything witty; I'll be quite the other
way.'

'But there's no reason you shouldn't learn the manner.  That's the way
I succeed.  Fix your eye on one of the bottles; put your thumbs in your
waist-coat pockets; stick out your elbows, bend your knees a little,
and then go ahead.'

'Oh, ah! go ahead; that's all very well; but you can't go ahead if you
haven't got any steam.'

'A very little does it.  There can be nothing so easy as your speech. 
When one has to say anything new every year about the farmers'
daughters, why one has to use one's brains a bit.  Let's see: how will
you begin?  Of course, you'll say that you are not accustomed to this
sort of thing; that the honour conferred upon you is too much for your
feelings; that the bright array of beauty and talent around you quite 
overpowers your tongue, and all that sort of thing.  Then declare
you're a Gresham to the backbone.'

'Oh, they know that.'

'Well, tell them again.  Then of course you must say something about
us; or you'll have the countess as black as old Nick.'

'Abut my aunt, George?  What on earth can I say about her when she's
there herself before me?'

'Before you! of course; that's just the reason.  Oh, say any lie you
can think of; you must say something about us.  You know we've come
down from London on purpose.'

Frank, in spite of the benefit of receiving from his cousin's 
erudition, could not help wishing in his heart that they had al
remained in London; but this he kept to himself.  He thanked his cousin
for his hints, and though he did not feel that the trouble of his mind
was completely cured, he began to hope that he might go through the
ordeal without disgracing himself.

Nevertheless, he felt rather sick at heart when Mr Baker got up to
propose the toast as soon as the servants were gone.  The servants,
that is, were gone officially; but they were there in a body, men and
women, nurses, cooks, and ladies' maids, coachmen, grooms, and footmen,
standing in two doorways to hear what Master Frank would say.  The old 
housekeeper headed the maids at one door, standing boldly inside the
room; and the butler controlled the men at the other, marshalling them
back with a drawn corkscrew.

Mr Baker did not say much; but what he did say, he said well. They had
all seen Frank Gresham grow up from a child; and were now required to
welcome as a man amongst them one who was well qualified to carry on
the honour of that loved and respected family.  His young friend,
Frank, was every inch a Gresham.  Mr Baker omitted to make mention of
the infusion of De Courcy blood, and the countess, therefore, drew
herself up on her chair and looked as though she were extremely bored. 
He then alluded tenderly to his own long friendship with the present
squire, Francis Newbold Gresham the elder; and sat down, begging them
to drink health, prosperity, long life, and excellent wife to their
dear friend Francis Newbold Gresham the younger.

There was a great jingling of glasses, of course; made the merrier and
the louder by the fact that the ladies were still there as well as the
gentlemen.  Ladies don't drink toasts frequently; and, therefore, the
occasion coming rarely was the more enjoyed.  'God bless you, Frank!' 
'Your good health, Frank!'  'And especially a good wife, Frank!'  'Two 
or three of them, Frank!'  'Good health and prosperity to you, Mr
Gresham!' 'More power to you, Frank, my boy!'  'May God bless you and
preserve you, my dear boy!' and then a merry, sweet, eager voice from
the far end of the table, 'Frank!  Frank!  Do look at me, pray do
Frank; I am drinking your health in real wine; ain't I, papa?'  Such
were the addresses which greeted Mr Francis Newbold Gresham the younger
as he essayed to rise up on his feet for the first time since he had
come to man's estate.

When the clatter was at an end, and he was fairly on his legs, he cast
a glance before him on the table, to look for a decanter.  He had not
much liked his cousin's theory of sticking to the bottle; nevertheless,
in the difficulty of the moment, it was well to have any system to go
by.  But, as misfortune would have it, though the table was covered
with bottles, his eye could not catch one.  Indeed, his eye first could
catch nothing, for the things swam before him, and the guests all
seemed to dance in their chairs.

Up he got, however, and commenced his speech.  As he could not follow
his preceptor's advice, as touching the bottle, he adopted his own
crude plan of 'making a mark on some old covey's head,' and therefore
looked dead at the doctor.

'Upon my word, I am very much obliged to you, gentlemen and ladies,
ladies and gentlemen, I should say, for drinking my health, and doing
me so much honour, and all that sort of thing.  Upon my word I am. 
Especially to you, Mr Baker.  I don't mean you, Harry, you're not Mr
Baker.'

'As much as you're Mr Gresham, Master Frank.'

'But I am not Mr Gresham; and I don't mean to be for many a long year
if I can help it; not at any rate till we have had another coming of
age here.'

'Bravo, Frank; and whose will that be?'

'That will be my son, and a very fine lad he will be; and I hope he'll
make a better speech than his father.  Mr Baker said I was every inch a
Gresham.  Well, I hope I am.'  Here the countess began to look cold and
angry.  'I hope the day will never come when my father won't own me for
one.'

'There's no fear, no fear,' said the doctor, who was almost put out of
countenance by the orator's intense gaze.  The countess looked colder
and more angry, and muttered something to herself about a bear-garden.

'Gardez Gresham; eh?  Harry! mind that when you're sticking in a gap
I'm coming after you.  Well, I am sure I am very obliged to you for the
honour you have all done me, especially the ladies who don't do this
sort of things on ordinary occasions. I wish they did; don't you,
doctor?  And talking of the ladies, my aunty and cousins have come all
the way from London to hear me take this speech which certainly is not
worth the trouble; but, all the same I am very much obliged to them.' 
And he looked round and made a little bow at the countess.  'And so I
am to Mr and Mrs Jackson, and Mr and Mrs and Miss Bateson, and Mr
Baker--I'm not at all obliged to you, Harry--and to Mr Oriel and Miss
Oriel, and to Mr Umbleby, and to Dr Thorne, and to Mary--I beg her
pardon, I mean Miss Thorne.'  And then he sat down, amid the loud 
plaudits of the company, and a string of blessings which came from the
servants behind him. 

After this the ladies rose and departed.  As she went, Lady Arabella,
kissed her son's forehead, and then his sisters kissed him, and one or
two of his lady-cousins; and then Miss Bateson shook him by the hand. 
'Oh, Miss Bateson,' said he, 'I though the kissing was to go all round.'
So Miss Bateson laughed and went her way; and Patience Oriel nodded at
him, but Mary Thorne, as she quietly left the room, almost hidden among
the extensive draperies of the grander ladies, hardly allowed her eyes
to meet his.

He got up to hold the door for them as the passed; and as they went, he
managed to take Patience by the hand; he took her hand and pressed it
for a moment, but dropped it quickly, in order that he might go through
the same ceremony with Mary, but Mary was too quick for him.

'Frank,' said Mr Gresham, as soon as the door was closed, 'bring your
glass here, my boy;' and the father made room for his son close beside
himself.  'The ceremony is now over, so you may have your place of
dignity.' Frank sat himself down where he was told, and Mr Gresham put
his hand on his son's shoulder and half caressed him, while the tears
stood in his eyes.  'I think the doctor is right, Baker, I think he'll 
never make us ashamed of him.'

'I am sure he never will,' said Baker.

'I don't think he ever will,' said Dr Thorne.

The tones of the men's voices were very different.  Mr Baker did not
care a straw about it; why should he?  He had an heir of his own as
well as the squire; one also who was the apple of his eye.  But the
doctor,--he did care; he had a niece, to be sure, whom he loved, perhaps
as well as these men loved their sons; but there was room in his heart
also for young Frank Gresham.

After this small expose of feeling they sat silent for a moment or
two.  But silence was not dear to the heart of the Honourable John, and
so he took up the running.

'That's a niceish nag you gave Frank this morning,' he said to his
uncle.  'I was looking at him before dinner.  He is a Monsoon, isn't
he?'

'Well I can't say I know how he was bred,' said the squire.  'He should
a good deal of breeding.'

'He's a Monsoon, I'm sure,' said the Honourable John.  'They've all
those ears, and that peculiar dip in the back.  I suppose you gave a
goodish figure for him?'

'Not so very much,' said the squire.

'He's a trained hunter, I suppose?'

'If not, he soon will be,' said the squire.

'Let Frank alone for that,' said Harry Baker.

'He jumps beautifully, sir,' said Frank.  'I haven't tried him myself,
but Peter made him go over the bar two or three times this morning.'

The Honourable John was determined to give his cousin a helping hand,
as he considered it.  He thought that Frank was very ill used in being
put off with so incomplete stud, and thinking also that the son had not
spirit enough to attack his father himself on the subject, the
Honourable John determined to do it for him.

'He's the making of a very nice horse, I don't doubt.  I wish you had a
string like him, Frank.'

Frank felt the blood rush to his face.  He would not for worlds have
his father think that he was discontented, or otherwise than pleased
with the present he had received that morning.  He was heartily ashamed
of himself in that he had listened with a certain degree of complacency
to his cousin's tempting; but he had no idea that the subject would be 
repeated--and then repeated, too, before his father, in a manner to vex
him on such a day as this, before such people as were assembled here.
He was very angry with his cousin, and for a moment forgot all his
hereditary respect for a De Courcy.

'I tell you what, John,' said he, 'do you choose your day, some day
early in the season, and come out on the best thing you have, and I'll
bring, not the black horse, but my old mare; and then do you try to
keep near me.  If I don't leave you at the back of God-speed before
long, I'll give you the mare and the horse too.'

The Honourable John was not known in Barsetshire as one of the most
forward of its riders.  He was a man much addicted to hunting, as far
as the get-up of the thing was concerned; he was great in boots and
breeches; wondrously conversant with bits and bridles; he had quite a
collection of saddles; and patronized every newest invention for
carrying spare shoes, sandwiches, and flasks of sherry.  He was
prominent at the cover side;--some people, including the master of
hounds, thought him perhaps a little too loudly prominent; he affected
a familiarity with the dogs, and was on speaking acquaintance with
every man's horse.  But when the work was cut out, when the pace began
to be sharp, when it behoved a man either to ride or visibly to decline
to ride, then--so at least said they who had not the De Courcy interest
quite closely at heart--then, in those heart-stirring moments, the 
Honourable John was too often found deficient.

There was, therefore, a considerable laugh at his expense when Frank,
instigated to this innocent boast by a desire to save his father,
challenged his cousin to a trial of prowess.  The Honourable John was
not, perhaps, as much accustomed to the ready use of his tongue as was
his honourable brother, seeing that it was not his annual business to
depict the glories of the farmers' daughters; at any rate, on this
occasion he seemed to be at some loss for words; he shut up, as the
slang phrase goes, and made no further allusion to the necessity of 
supplying young Gresham with a proper stream of hunters.

But the old squire had understood it all; had understood the meaning of
his nephew's attack; had thoroughly understood the meaning of his son's
defence, and the feeling which actuated it.  He also had thought of the
stableful of horses which had belonged to himself when he became of
age; and of the much more humble position which his son would have to
fill than that which his father had prepared for him.  He thought of 
this, and was sad enough, though he had sufficient spirit to hide from
his friends around him the fact, that the Honourable John's arrow had
not been discharged in vain.

'He shall have Champion,' said the father to himself.  'It is time for
me to give up.'

Now Champion was one of the two fine old hunters which the squire kept
for his own use.  And it might have been said of him now, at the period
of which we are speaking, that the only really happy moments of his
life were those which he spent in the field.  So much as to its being
time for him to give up.



CHAPTER VI

FRANK GRESHAM'S EARLY LOVES

It was, we have said, the first of July, and such being the time of the
year, the ladies, after sitting in the drawing-room for half an hour
or so, began to think that they might as well go through the
drawing-room windows on to the lawn.  First one slipped out a little
way, and then another; and then they got on to the lawn; and then they
talked of their hats; till, by degrees, the younger ones of the party,
and the last of the elder also, found themselves dressed for walking.

The windows, both of the drawing-room, and the dining-room, looked out
on to the lawn; and it was only natural that the girls should walk from
the former to the latter.  It was only natural that they, being there,
should tempt their swains to come to them by the sight of their
broad-brimmed hats and evening dresses; and natural, also, that the
temptation should not be resisted.  The squire, therefore, and the
elder male guests soon found themselves alone round their wine.

'Upon my word, we were enchanted by your eloquence, Mr Gresham, were we
not?' said Miss Oriel, turning to one of the De Courcy girls who was
with her.

Miss Oriel was a very pretty girl; a little older than Frank 
Gresham,--perhaps a year or so.  She had dark hair, large round dark
eyes, a nose a little too broad, a pretty mouth, a beautiful chin, and,
as we have said before, a large fortune;--that is, moderately large--let
us say twenty thousand pounds, there or thereabouts.  She and her
brother had been living at Greshamsbury for the last two years, the
living having been purchased for him--such were Mr Gresham's 
necessities--during the lifetime of the last old incumbent.  Miss Oriel
was in every respect a nice neighbour; she was good-humoured,
lady-like, lively, neither too clever nor too stupid, belonging to a
good family, sufficiently fond of this world's good things, as became a
pretty young lady so endowed, and sufficiently fond, also, of the other
world's good things, as became the mistress of a clergyman's house.

'Indeed, yes;' said the Lady Margaretta.  'Frank is very eloquent. When
he described our rapid journey from London, he nearly moved me to
tears.  But well as he talks, I think he carves better.'

'I wish you'd had to do it, Margaretta; both the carving and the
talking.'

'Thank you, Frank; you're very civil.'

'But there's one comfort, Miss Oriel; it's over now, and done. A fellow
can't be made to come of age twice.'

'But you'll take your degree, Mr Gresham; and then, of course, there'll
be another speech; and then you'll get married, and there will be two
or three more.'

'I'll speak at your wedding, Miss Oriel, before I do at my own.'

'I shall not have the slightest objection.  It will be so kind of you
to patronize my husband.'

'But, by Jove, will he patronize me?  I know you'll marry some awful
bigwig, or some terribly clever fellow; won't she, Margaretta?'

'Miss Oriel was saying so much in praise of you before you came out,'
said Margaretta, 'that I began to think that her mind was intent at
remaining at Greshamsbury all her life.'

Frank blushed, and Patience laughed.  There was but a year's difference
in their age; but Frank, however, was still a boy, though Patience was
fully a woman.

'I am ambitious, Lady Margaretta,' said she.  'I own it; but I am
moderate in my ambition.  I do love Greshamsbury, and if Mr Gresham had
a younger brother, perhaps, you know--'

'Another just like myself, I suppose,' said Frank.

'Oh, yes.  I could not possibly wish for any change.'

'Just as eloquent as you are, Frank,' said the Lady Margaretta.

'And as good a carver,' said Patience.

'Miss Bateson has lost her heart to him for ever, because of his
carving,' said the Lady Margaretta.

'But perfection never repeats itself,' said Patience.

'Well, you see, I have not got any brothers,' said Frank; 'so all I can
do is to sacrifice myself.'

'Upon my word, Mr Gresham, I am under more than ordinary obligations to
you; I am indeed,' said Miss Oriel, stood still in the path, and made a
very graceful curtsy.  'Dear me!  only think, Lady Margaretta, that I
should be honoured with an offer from the heir the very moment he is
legally entitled to make one.'

'And done with so much true gallantry, too,' said the other; 
'expressing himself quite willing to postpone any views of his own for
your advantage.'

'Yes;' said Patience; 'that's what I value so much: had he loved me
now, there would have been no merit on his part; but a sacrifice you
know--'

'Yes, ladies are so fond of such sacrifices, Frank, upon my word, I had
no idea you were so very excellent at making speeches.'

'Well,' said Frank, 'I shouldn't have said sacrifice, that was a slip;
what I meant was--'

'Oh, dear me,' said Patience, 'wait a minute; now we are going to have
a regular declaration.  Lady Margaretta, you haven't a scent-bottle,
have you?  And if I should faint, where's the garden-chair?'

'Oh, but I'm not going to make a declaration at all,' said Frank.

'Are you not?  Oh!  Now, Lady Margaretta, I appeal to you; did you not
understand him to say something very particular?'

'Certainly, I thought nothing could be plainer,' said the Lady
Margaretta.

'And so, Mr Gresham, I am to be told, that after all it means nothing,'
said Patience, putting her handkerchief up to her eyes.

'It means that you are an excellent hand at quizzing a fellow like me.'

'Quizzing!  No; but you are an excellent hand at deceiving a poor girl
like me.  Well, remember, I have got a witness; here is Lady
Margaretta, who heard it all.  What a pity it is that my brother is a
clergyman.  You calculated on that, I know; or you would never had
served me so.'

She said so just as her brother joined them, or rather just as he had
joined Lady Margaretta de Courcy; for her ladyship and Mr Oriel walked
on in advance by themselves.  Lady Margaretta had found it rather dull
work, making a third in Miss Oriel's flirtation with her cousin; the
more so as she was quite accustomed to take a principal part herself in
all such transactions.  She therefore not unwillingly walked on with Mr
Oriel.  Mr Oriel, it must be conceived, was not a common, everyday
parson, but had points about him which made him quite fit to associate
with an earl's daughter.  And as it was known that he was not a
marrying man, having very exalted ideas on that point connected with
his profession, the Lady Margaretta, of course, had the less objection
to trust herself alone with him.

But directly she was gone, Miss Oriel's tone of banter ceased. It was
very well making a fool of a lad of twenty-one when others were by; but
there might be danger in it when they were alone together.

'I don't know any position on earth more enviable than yours, Mr
Gresham,' said she, quite soberly and earnestly; 'how happy you ought
to be.'

'What, in being laughed at by you, Miss Oriel, for pretending to be a
man, when you choose to make out that I am only a boy? I can bear to be
laughed at pretty well generally, but I can't say that your laughing at
me makes me feel so happy as you say I ought to be.'

Frank was evidently of an opinion totally different from that of Miss
Oriel.  Miss Oriel, when she found herself tete-a-tete with him,
thought it was time to give over flirting; Frank, however, imagined
that it was just the moment for him to begin. So he spoke and looked
very languishing, and put on him quite the airs of an Orlando.

'Oh, Mr Gresham, such good friends as you and I may laugh at each
other, may we not?'

'You may do what you like, Miss Oriel: beautiful women I believe always
may; but you remember what the spider said to the fly, "That which is
sport to you, may be death to me."' Anyone looking at Frank's face as
he said that, might well have imagined that he was breaking his very
heart for love of Miss Oriel.  Oh, Master Frank!  Master Frank! if you
act thus in the green leaf, what will you do in the dry?

While Frank Gresham was thus misbehaving himself, and going on as
though to him belonged the privilege of falling in love with pretty
faces, as it does to ploughboys and other ordinary people, his great
interests were not forgotten by those guardian saints who were so
anxious to shower down on his head all manner of temporal blessings.

Another conversation had taken place in the Greshamsbury gardens, in
which nothing light had been allowed to present itself; nothing
frivolous had been spoken.  The countess, the Lady Arabella, and Miss
Gresham had been talking over Greshamsbury affairs, and they had
latterly been assisted by the Lady Amelia, than whom no De Courcy ever
born was more wise, more solemn, more prudent, more proud.  The
ponderosity of her qualifications for nobility was sometimes too much 
even for her mother, and her devotion for the peerage was such, that
she would certainly have declined a seat in heaven if offered to her
without the promise that it should be in the upper house.

The subject first discussed had been Augusta's prospects.  Mr Moffat
had been invited to Courcy Castle, and Augusta had been taken thither
to meet him, with the express intention on the part of the countess,
that they should be man and wife.  The countess had been careful to
make it intelligible to her sister-in-law and niece, that though Mr
Moffat would do excellently well for a daughter of Greshamsbury, he
could not be allowed to raise his eyes to a female scion of Courcy 
Castle.

'Not that we personally dislike him,' said the Lady Amelia; 'but rank
has its drawbacks, Augusta.'  As the Lady Amelia was now somewhat
nearer forty than thirty, and was still allowed to walk, 

    'In maiden meditation, fancy free,'

it may be presumed that in her case rank had been found to have serious
drawbacks.

To this Augusta said nothing in objection.  Whether desirable by a De
Courcy or not, the match was to be hers, and there was no doubt
whatever as to the wealth of the man whose name she was to take; the
offer had been made, not to her, but to her aunt; the acceptance had
been expressed, not by her, but by her aunt.  Had she thought of
recapitulating in her memory all that had ever passed between Mr Moffat
and herself, she would have found that it did not amount to more than
the most ordinary conversation between chance partners in a ball-room. 
Nevertheless, she was to be Mrs Moffat.  All that Mr Gresham knew of
him was, that when he met the young man for the first and only time in
his life, he found him extremely hard to deal with in the matter of
money.  He had insisted on having ten thousand pounds with his wife,
and at last refused to go on with the match unless he got six thousand
pounds.  This latter sum the poor squire had undertaken to pay him.

Mr Moffat had been for a year or two MP for Barchester; having been
assisted in his views on that ancient city by all the De Courcy
interest.  He was a Whig, of course.  Not only had Barchester,
departing from the light of other days, returned a Whig member of
Parliament, but it was declared, that at the next election, now near at
hand, a Radical would be sent up, an man pledged to the ballot, to
economies of all sorts, one who would carry out Barchester politics in
all their abrupt, obnoxious, pestilent virulence.  This was one 
Scatcherd, a great railway contractor, a man who was a native of
Barchester, who had bought property in the neighbourhood, and who had
achieved a sort of popularity there and elsewhere by the violence of
his democratic opposition to the aristocracy.  According to this man's
political tenets, the Conservatives should be laughed at as fools, but
the Whigs should be hated as knaves.

Mr Moffat was now coming down to Courcy Castle to look after his
electioneering interests, and Miss Gresham was to return with her aunt
to meet him.  The countess was very anxious that Frank should also
accompany them.  Her great doctrine, that he must marry money, had been
laid down with authority, and received without doubt.  She now pushed
it further, and said that no time should be lost; that he should not
only marry money, but do so very early in life; there was always a 
danger in delay.  The Greshams--of course she alluded only to the males
of the family--were foolishly soft-hearted; no one could say what might
happen.  There was that Miss Thorne always at Greshamsbury.

This was more than Lady Arabella could stand.  She protested that there
was at least no ground for supposing that Frank would absolutely
disgrace his family.

Still the countess continued: 'Perhaps not,' she said; 'but when young
people of perfectly different ranks were allowed to associate together,
there was no saying what danger might arise.  They all know that old Mr
Bateson--the present Mr Bateson's father--had gone off with the
governess; and young Mr Everbeery, near Taunton, had only the other day
married a cook-maid.'

'But Mr Everbeery was always drunk, aunt,' said Augusta, feeling called
upon to say something for her brother.

'Never mind, my dear; these things do happen, and they are very
dreadful.'

'Horrible!' said the Lady Amelia; 'diluting the best blood of the
country, and paving the way for revolution.'  This was very grand; but,
nevertheless, Augusta could not but feel that she perhaps might be
about to dilute the blood of her coming children in marrying the
tailor's son.  She consoled herself by trusting that, at any rate, she
paved the way for no revolution.

'When a thing is so necessary,' said the countess, 'it cannot be done
too soon.  Now, Arabella, I don't say that anything will come of it;
but it may; Miss Dunstable is coming down to us next week.  Now, we all
know that when old Dunstable died last year, he left over two hundred
thousand to his daughter.'

'It is a great deal of money, certainly,' said Lady Arabella.

'It wold pay off everything, and a great deal more,' said the countess.

'It was ointment, was it not, aunt?' said Augusta.

'I believe so, my dear; something called the ointment of Lebanon, or
something of that sort: but there's no doubt about the money.'

'But how old is she, Robina?' asked the anxious mother.

'About thirty, I suppose; but I don't think that much signifies.'

'Thirty,' said Lady Arabella, rather dolefully.  'And what is she
like?  I think that Frank already begins to like girls that are young
and pretty.'

'But surely, aunt,' said the Lady Amelia, 'now that he has come to
man's discretion, he will not refuse to consider all that he owes to
his family.  A Mr Gresham of Greshamsbury has a position to support.' 
The De Courcy scion spoke these last words in the sort of tone that a
parish clergyman would use, in warning some young farmer's son that he
should not put himself on an equal footing with the ploughboys.

It was at last decided that the countess should herself convey to Frank
a special invitation to Courcy Castle, and that when she got him there,
she should do all that lay in her power to prevent his return to
Cambridge, and to further the Dunstable marriage.

'We did think of Miss Dunstable for Porlock, once,' she said, naively;
'but when we found that it wasn't much over two hundred thousand, why
that idea fell to the ground.'  The terms on which the De Courcy blood
might be allowed to dilute itself were, it must be presumed, very high
indeed.

Augusta was sent off to find her brother, and to send him to the
countess in the small drawing-room.  Here the countess was to have her
tea, apart from the outer common world, and her, without interruption,
she was to teach her great lesson to her nephew.

Augusta did find her brother, and found him in the worst of bad
society--so at least the stern De Courcys would have thought.  Old Mr
Bateson and the governess, Mr Everbeery and his cook's diluted blood,
and ways paved for revolutions, all presented themselves to Augusta's
mind when she found her brother walking with no other company than Mary
Thorne, and walking with her, too, in much too close proximity.

How he had contrived to be off with the old love and so soon on with
the new, or rather, to be off with the new love and again on with the
old, we will not stop to inquire.  Had Lady Arabella, in truth, known
all her son's doings in this way, could she have guessed how very nigh
he had approached the iniquity of old Mr Bateson, and to the folly of
young Mr Everbeery, she would in truth have been in a hurry to send him
off to Courcy Castle and Miss Dunstable.  Some days before the
commencement of our story, young Frank had sworn in sober earnest--in
what he intended for his most sober earnest, his most earnest
sobriety--that he loved Mary Thorne with a love for which words could
find no sufficient expression--with a love that could never die, never
grow dim, never become less, which no opposition on the part of others 
could extinguish, which no opposition on her part could repel; that he
might, could, would, and should have her for his wife, and that if she
told him she didn't love him, he would--

'Oh, oh!  Mary; do you love me?  Don't you love me?  Won't you love
me?  Say you will.  Oh, Mary, dearest Mary, will you?  won't you? do
you?  don't you?  Come now, you have a right to give a fellow an
answer.'

With such eloquence had the heir of Greshamsbury, when not yet
twenty-one years of age, attempted to possess himself of the affections
of the doctor's niece.  And yet three days afterwards he was quite
ready to flirt with Miss Oriel.

If such things are done in the green wood, what will be done in the
dry?

And what had Mary said when those fervent protestations of an undying
love had been thrown at her feet?  Mary, it must be remembered, was
very nearly of the same age as Frank; but, as I an others have so often
said before, 'Women grow on the sunny side of the wall.'  Though Frank
was only a boy, it behoved Mary to be something more than a girl. Frank
might be allowed, without laying himself open to much reproach, to 
throw all of what he believed to be his heart into a protestation of
what he believed to be love; but Mary was in duty bound to be more
thoughtful, more reticent, more aware of the facts of their position,
more careful of her own feelings, and more careful also of his.

And yet she could not put him down as another young lady might put down
another young gentleman.  It is very seldom that a young man, unless he
be tipsy, assumes an unwelcome familiarity in his early acquaintance
with any girl; but when acquaintance has been long and intimate,
familiarities must follow as a matter of course.  Frank and Mary had
been so much together in his holidays, had so constantly consorted 
together as boys and girls, that, as regarded her, he had not that
innate fear of a woman which represses a young man's tongue; and she
was so used to his good-humour, his fun, and high jovial spirits, and
was, withal, so fond of them and him, that it was very difficult for
her to mark with accurate feeling, and stop with reserved brow, the
shade of change from a boy's liking to a man's love.

And Beatrice, too, had done harm in this matter.  With a spirit
painfully unequal to that of her grand relatives, she had quizzed Mary
and Frank about their early flirtations.  This she had done; but had
instinctively avoided doing so before her mother and sister, and had
thus made a secret of it, as it were, between herself, Mary, and her
brother;--had given currency, as it were, to the idea that there might
be something serious between the two.  Not that Beatrice had ever
wished to promote a marriage between them, or had even thought of such a
thing.  She was girlish, thoughtless, imprudent, inartistic, and very
unlike a De Courcy.  Very unlike a De Courcy she was in all that; but,
nevertheless, she had the De Courcy veneration for blood, and, more
than that, she had the Gresham feeling joined to that of the De 
Courcys.  The Lady Amelia would not for worlds have had the De Courcy
blood defiled; but gold she thought could not defile.  Now Beatrice was
ashamed of her sister's marriage, and had often declared, within her
own heart, that nothing could have made her marry a Mr Moffat.

She had said so also to Mary, and Mary had told her that she was
right.  Mary was also proud of blood, was proud of her uncle's blood,
and the two girls talked together in all the warmth of girlish
confidence, of the great glories of family traditions and family
honours.  Beatrice had talked in utter ignorance as to her friend's
birth; and Mary, poor Mary, she had talked, being as ignorant; but not
without a strong suspicion that, at some future time, a day of sorrow
would tell her some fearful truth.

On one point Mary's mind was strongly made up.  No wealth, no mere
worldly advantage could make any one her superior.  If she were born a
gentlewoman, then was she fit to match with any gentleman.  Let the
most wealthy man in Europe pour all his wealth at her feet, she could,
if so inclined, give him back at any rate more than that.  That offered
at her feet she knew she would never tempt her to yield up the fortress
of her heart, the guardianship of her soul, the possession of her mind;
not that alone, nor that, even, as any possible slightest fraction of a
make-weight.

If she were born a gentlewoman!  And then came to her mind those
curious questions; what makes a gentleman? what makes a gentlewoman? 
What is the inner reality, the spiritualised quintessence of that
privilege in the world which men call rank, which forces the thousands
and hundreds of thousands to bow down before the few elect?  What
gives, or can give it, or should give it?'

And she answered the question.  Absolute, intrinsic, acknowledged,
individual merit must give it to its possessor, let him be whom, and
what, and whence he might.  So far the spirit of democracy was strong
with her.  Beyond this it could be had but by inheritance, received as
it were second-hand, or twenty-second hand.  And so far the spirit of 
aristocracy was strong within her.  All this she had, as may be
imagined, learnt in early years from her uncle; and all this she was at
great pains to teach Beatrice Gresham, the chosen of her heart.

When Frank declared that Mary had a right to give him an answer, he
meant that he had a right to expect one.  Mary acknowledged this right,
and gave it to him.

'Mr Gresham,' she said.

'Oh, Mary; Mr Gresham!'

'Yes, Mr Gresham.  It must be Mr Gresham, after that.  And, moreover,
it must be Miss Thorne as well.'

'I'll be shot if it shall, Mary.'

'Well; I can't say that I shall be shot if it be not so; but if it be
not so, if you do not agree that it shall be so, I shall be turned out
of Greshamsbury.'

'What! you mean my mother?' said Frank.

'Indeed!  I mean no such thing,' said Mary, with a flash from her eye
that made Frank almost start.  'I mean no such thing. I mean you, not
your mother.  I am not in the least afraid of Lady Arabella; but I am
afraid of you.'

'Afraid of me, Mary!'

'Miss Thorne; pray, pray, remember.  It must be Miss Thorne. Do not
turn me out of Greshamsbury.  Do not separate me from Beatrice.  It is
you that will drive me out; no one else.  I could stand my ground
against your mother--I feel I could; but I cannot stand against you if
you treat me otherwise than--than--'

'Otherwise than what?  I want to treat you as the girl I have chosen
from all the world as my wife.'

'I am sorry you should so soon have found it necessary to make a
choice.  But, Mr Gresham, we must not joke about this at present.  I am
sure you would not willingly injure me; but if you speak to me, or of
me, again in that way, you will injure me, injure me so much that I
shall be forced to leave Greshamsbury, in my own defence.  I know you
are too generous to drive me to that.'

And so the interview had ended.  Frank, of course, went upstairs to see
if his new pocket-pistols were all ready,