 properly cleaned, loaded, and
capped, should he find, after a few days' experience, that prolonged
existence was unendurable.

However, he managed to live through the subsequent period; doubtless
with a view of preventing any appointment to his father's guests.



CHAPTER VII

THE DOCTOR'S GARDEN

Mary had contrived to quiet her lover with considerable propriety of
demeanour.  Then came on her the somewhat harder task of quieting
herself.  Young ladies, on the whole, are perhaps quite as susceptible
of the after feelings as young gentlemen are.  Now Frank Gresham, was
handsome, amiable, by no means a fool in intellect, excellent in heart;
and he was, moreover, a gentleman, being the son of Mr Gresham of 
Greshamsbury.  Mary had been, as it were, brought up to love him.  Had
aught but good happened to him, she would have cried as for a brother. 
It must not therefore be supposed that when Frank Gresham told her that
he loved her, she had heard it altogether unconcerned.

He had not, perhaps, made his declaration with that propriety of
language in which such scenes are generally described as being carried
on.  Ladies may perhaps think that Mary should have been deterred, by
the very boyishness of his manner, from thinking at all seriously on
the subject.  His 'will you, won't you--do you, don't you?' does not
sound like the poetic raptures of a highly inspired lover.  But, 
nevertheless, there had been warmth, and a reality in it not in itself
repulsive; and Mary's anger--anger? no, not anger--her objections to the
declarations were probably not based on the absurdity of her lover's
language.

We are inclined to think that these matters are not always discussed by
mortal lovers in the poetically passionate phraseology which is
generally thought to be appropriate for their description.  A man
cannot well describe that which he has never seen or heard; but the
absolute words and acts of one such scene did once come to the author's
knowledge.  The couple were by no means plebeian, or below the proper 
standard of high bearing and high breeding; they were a handsome pair,
living among educated people, sufficiently given to mental pursuits,
and in every way what a pair of polite lovers ought to be.  The
all-important conversation passed in this wise.  The site of the
passionate scene was the sea-shore, on which they were walking, in
autumn.

Gentleman.  'Well, Miss --, the long and short of it is this: here I am;
you can take me or leave me.'

Lady-scratching a gutter on the sand with her parasol, so as to allow a
little salt water to run out of one hole into another. 'Of course, I
know that's all nonsense.'

Gentleman.  'Nonsense!  By Jove, it isn't nonsense at all: come, Jane;
here I am: come, at any rate you can say something.'

Lady.  'Yes, I suppose I can say something.'

Gentleman.  'Well, which is it to be; take me or leave me?'

Lady--very slowly, and with a voice perhaps hardly articulate, carrying
on, at the same time, her engineering works on a wider scale.  'Well, I
don't exactly want to leave you.'

And so the matter was settled: settled with much propriety and
satisfaction; and both the lady and gentleman would have thought, had
they ever thought about the matter at all, that this, the sweetest
moment of their lives, had been graced by all the poetry by which such
moments ought to be hallowed.

When Mary had, as she thought, properly subdued young Frank, the offer
of whose love she, at any rate, knew was, at such a period of his life,
an utter absurdity, then she found it necessary to subdue herself. What
happiness on earth could be greater than the possession of such a love,
had the true possession been justly and honestly within her reach? What
man could be more lovable than such a man as would grow from such a
boy?  And then, did she not love him--love him already, without waiting
for any change?  Did she not feel that there was that about him, about
him and about herself, too, which might so well fit them for each
other?  It would be so sweet to be the sister of Beatrice, the daughter
of the squire, to belong to Greshamsbury as a part and parcel of
itself.

But though she could not restrain these thoughts, it never for a moment
occurred to her to take Frank's offer in earnest.  Though she was a
grown woman, he was still a boy.  He would have to see the world before
he settled in it, and would change his mind about woman half a score of
times before he married. Then, too, though she did not like the Lady
Arabella, she felt that she owed something, if not to her kindness, at
least to her forbearance; and she knew, felt inwardly certain, that she
would be doing wrong, that the world would say that she was doing
wrong, that her uncle would think her wrong, if she endeavoured to take
advantage of what had passed.

She had not for an instant doubted; not for a moment had she 
contemplated it as possible that she should ever become Mrs Gresham
because Frank had offered to make her so; but, nevertheless, she could
not help thinking of what had occurred--of thinking of it, most probably
much more than Frank did himself.

A day or two afterwards, on the evening before Frank's birthday, she
was alone with her uncle, walking in the garden behind their house, and
she then essayed to question him, with the object of learning if she
were fitted by her birth to be the wife of such a one as Frank
Gresham.  They were in the habit of walking there together when he
happened to be at home of a summer's evening.  This was not often the
case, for his hours of labour extended much beyond those usual to the 
upper working world, the hours, namely, between breakfast and dinner;
but those minutes that they did thus pass together, the doctor regarded
as perhaps the pleasantest of his life.

'Uncle,' said she, after a while, 'what do you think of this marriage
of Miss Gresham's?'

'Well, Minnie'--such was his name of endearment for her--'I can't say I
have thought much about it, and I don't suppose anybody else has
either.'

'She must think about it, of course; and so must he, I suppose.'

'I'm not so sure of that.  Some folks would never get married if they
had to trouble themselves with thinking about it.'

'I suppose that's why you never got married, uncle?'

'Either that, or thinking of it too much.  One is as bad as the other.'

'Well, I have been thinking about it, at any rate, uncle.'

'That's very good of you; that will save me the trouble; and perhaps
save Miss Gresham too.  If you have thought it over thoroughly, that
will do for all.'

'I believe Mr Moffat is a man of no family.'

'He'll mend in that point, no doubt, when he has got a wife.'

'Uncle, you're a goose; and what is worse, a very provoking goose.'

'Niece, you're a gander; and what is worse, a very silly gander.  What
is Mr Moffat's family to you, and me?  Mr Moffat has that which ranks
above family honours.  He is a very rich man.'

'Yes,' said Mary, 'I know he is rich; and a rich man I suppose can buy
anything--except a woman that is worth having.'

'A rich man can buy anything,' said the doctor; 'not that I meant to
say that Mr Moffat has bought Miss Gresham.  I have no doubt that they
will suit each other very well,' he added with an air of decisive
authority, as though he had finished the subject.

But his niece was determined not to let him pass so.  'Now, uncle,'said
she, 'you know you are pretending to a great deal of worldly wisdom,
which, after all, is not wisdom at all in your eyes.'

'Am I?'

'You know you are: and as for the impropriety of discussing Miss
Gresham's marriage--'

'I did not say it was improper.'

'Oh, yes, you did; of course such things must be discussed.  How is one
to have an opinion if one does not get it by looking at the things that
happen around us?'

'Now I am going to be blown up,' said Dr Thorne.

'Dear uncle, do be serious with me.'

'Well, then, seriously, I hope Miss Gresham will be very happy as Mrs
Moffat.'

'Of course you do: so do I.  I hope it as much as I can hope what I
don't at all see ground for expecting.'

'People constantly hope without any such ground.'

'Well, then, I'll hope in this case.  But, uncle--'

'Well, my dear?'

'I want your opinion, truly and really.  If you were a girl--'

'I am perfectly unable to give any opinion founded on so strange an
hypothesis.'

'Well; but if you were a marrying man.'

'The hypothesis is quite as much out of my way.'

'But, uncle, I am a girl, and perhaps I may marry;--or at any rate think
of marrying some day.'

'The latter alternative is certainly possible enough.'

'Therefore, in seeing a friend taking such a step, I cannot but
speculate on the matter as though I were myself in her place. If I were
Miss Gresham, should I be right?'

'But, Minnie, you are not Miss Gresham.'

'No, I am Mary Thorne; it is a very different thing, I know. I suppose
I might marry any one without degrading myself.'

It was almost ill-natured of her to say this; but she had not meant to
say it in the sense which the sounds seemed to bear. She had failed in
being able to bring her uncle to the point she wished by the road she
had planned, and in seeking another road, she had abruptly fallen into
unpleasant places.

'I should be very sorry that my niece should think so,' said he; 'and
am sorry, too, that she should say so.  But, Mary, to tell the truth, I
hardly know at what you are driving.  You are, I think, not so clear
minded--certainly, not so clear worded--as is usual with you.'

'I will tell you, uncle;' and, instead of looking up into his face, she
turned her eyes down on to the green lawn beneath her feet.

'Well, Minnie, what is it?' and he took both her hands in his.

'I think that Miss Gresham should not marry Mr Moffat.  I think so
because her family is high and noble, and because he is low and
ignoble.  When one has an opinion on such matters, one cannot but apply
it to things and people around one; and having applied my opinion to
her, the next step naturally is to apply it to myself.  Were I Miss
Gresham, I would not marry Mr Moffat though he rolled in gold.  I know
where to rank Miss Gresham. What I want to know is, where I ought to 
rank myself?'

They had been standing when she commenced he last speech; but as she
finished it, the doctor moved on again, and she moved with him.  He
walked on very slowly without answering her; and she, out of her full
mind, pursued aloud the tenor of her thoughts.

'That does not follow,' said the doctor quickly.  'A man raises a woman
to his own standard, but a woman must take that of her husband.'

Again they were silent, and again they walked on, Mary holding her
uncle's arm with both her hands.  She was determined, however, to come
to the point, and after considering for a while how best she might do
it, she ceased to beat any longer about the bush, and asked him a plain
question.

'The Thornes are as good a family as the Greshams are they not?'

'In absolute genealogy they are, my dear.  That is, when I choose to be
an old fool and talk of such matters in a sense different from that in
which they are spoken of by the world at large, I may say that the
Thornes are as good, or perhaps better, than the Greshams, but I should
be sorry to say so seriously to any one.  The Greshams now stand much
higher in the county than the Thornes do.'

'But they are of the same class.'

'Yes, yes; Wilfred Thorne of Ullathorne, and our friend the squire
here, are of the same class.'

'But, uncle, I and Augusta Gresham--are we of the same class?'

'Well, Minnie, you would hardly have me boast that I am the same class
with the squire--I, a poor country doctor?'

'You are not answering me fairly, dear uncle; dearest uncle, do you not
know that you are not answering me fairly?  You know what I mean.  Have
I a right to call the Thornes of Ullathorne my cousins?'

'Mary, Mary, Mary!' said he after a minute's pause, still allowing his
arm to hang loose, that she might hold it with both her hands.  'Mary,
Mary, Mary!  I would that you had spared me this!'

'I could not have spared it to you for ever, uncle.'

'I would that you could have done so; I would that you could!'

'It is over now, uncle: it is told now.  I will grieve you no more. 
Dear, dear, dearest!  I should love you more than ever now; I would, I
would, I would if that were possible.  What should I be but for you? 
What must I have been but for you?' And she threw herself on his
breast, and clinging with her arms round his neck, kissed his forehead,
cheeks, and lips.

There was nothing more said then on the subject between them. Mary
asked no further question, nor did the doctor volunteer further
information.  She would have been most anxious to ask about her
mother's history had she dared to do so; but she did not dare to ask;
she could not bear to be told that her mother had been, perhaps was, a
worthless woman.  That she was truly a daughter of a brother of the
doctor, that she did know.  Little as she had heard of her relatives in
her early youth, few as had been the words which had fallen from her 
uncle in her hearing as to her parentage, she did know this, that she
was the daughter of Henry Thorne, a brother of the doctor, and a son of
the old prebendary.  Trifling little things that had occurred,
accidents which could not be prevented, had told her this; but not a
word had ever passed any one's lips as to her mother.  The doctor, when
speaking of his youth, had spoken of her father; but no one had spoken 
of her mother.  She had long known that she was the child of a Thorne;
now she knew also that she was no cousin of the Thornes of Ullathorne;
no cousin, at least, in the world's ordinary language, no niece indeed
of her uncle, unless by his special permission that she should be so.

When the interview was over, she went up alone to the drawing-room, and
there she sat thinking.  She had not been there long before her uncle
came up to her.  He did not sit down, or even take off the hat which he
still wore; but coming close to her, and still standing, he spoke
thus:-

'Mary, after what has passed I should be very unjust and very cruel to
you not to tell you one thing more than you have now learned.  Your
mother was unfortunate in much, not in everything; but the world, which
is very often stern in such matters, never judged her to have disgraced
herself.  I tell you this, my child, in order that you may respect her 
memory;' and so saying, he again left her without giving her time to
speak a word.

What he then told her he had told in mercy.  He felt what must be her
feelings when she reflected that she had to blush for her mother; that
not only could she not speak of her mother, but that she might hardly
think of her with innocence; and to mitigate such sorrow as this, and
also to do justice to the woman whom his brother had so wronged, he had
forced himself to reveal so much as is stated above.

And then he walked slowly by himself, backwards and forwards through
the garden, thinking of what he had done with reference to this girl,
and doubting whether he had done wisely and well. He had resolved, when
first the little infant was given over to his charge, that nothing
should be known of her or by her as to her mother.  He was willing to 
devote himself to this orphan child of his brother, this last seedling
of his father's house; but he was not willing so to do this as to bring
himself in any manner into familiar contact with the Scatcherds.  He
had boasted to himself that he, at any rate, was a gentleman; and that
she, if she were to live in his house, sit at his table, and share his
hearth, must be a lady.  He would tell no lie about her; he would not 
to any one make her out to be aught other or aught better than she was;
people would talk about her of course, only let them not talk to him;
he conceived of himself--and the conception was not without due
ground--that should any do so, he had that within him which would
silence them.  He would never claim for this little creature--thus
brought into the world without a legitimate position in which to
stand--he would never claim for her any station that would not properly 
be her own.  He would make for her a station as best he could.  As he
might sink or swim, so should she.

So he had resolved; but things had arranged themselves, as they often
do, rather than been arranged by him.  During ten or twelve years no
one had heard of Mary Thorne; the memory of Henry Thorne and his tragic
death had passed away; the knowledge that an infant had been born whose
birth was connected with that tragedy, a knowledge never widely spread,
had faded down into utter ignorance.  At the end of these twelve years,
Dr Thorne had announced, that a young niece, a child of a brother long
since dead, was coming to live with him.  As he had contemplated, no
one spoke to him; but some people did no doubt talk among themselves. 
Whether or not the exact truth was surmised by any, it matters not to
say; with absolute exactness, probably not; with great approach to it,
probably yes.  By one person, at any rate, no guess whatever was made;
no thought relative to Dr Thorne's niece ever troubled him; no idea
that Mary Scatcherd had left a child in England ever occurred to him;
and that person was Roger Scatcherd, Mary's brother.

To one friend, and only one, did the doctor tell the whole truth, and
that was to the old squire.  'I have told you,' said the doctor,
'partly that you may know that the child has no right to mix with your
children if you think much of such things.  Do you, however, see to
this.  I would rather that no one else should be told.'

No one else had been told; and the squire had 'seen to it,' by
accustoming himself to look at Mary Thorne running about the house with
his own children as though she were of the same brood.  Indeed, the
squire had always been fond of Mary, had personally noticed her, and,
in the affair of Mam'selle Larron, had declared that he would have her
placed at once on the bench of magistrates;--much to the disgust of the
Lady Arabella.

And so things had gone on and on, and had not been thought of with much
downright thinking; till now, when she was one-and-twenty years of
age, his niece came to him, asking as to her position, and inquiring in
what rank of life she was to find a husband.

And so the doctor walked, backwards and forwards through the garden,
slowly, thinking now with some earnestness what if, after all, he had
been wrong about his niece?  What if by endeavouring to place her in
the position of a lady, he had falsely so placed her, and robbed her of
her legitimate position?  What if there was no rank of life in which
she could now properly attach herself?

And then, how had it answered, that plan of his of keeping her all to
himself?  He, Dr Thorne, was still a poor man; the gift of saving money
had not been his; he had ever a comfortable house for her to live in,
and, in spite of Doctors Fillgrave, Century, Rerechild, and others, had
made from his profession an income sufficient for their joint wants;
but he had not done as others do: he had no three or four thousand
pounds in the Three per Cents., on which Mary might live in some
comfort when he should die.  Late in life he had insured his life for
eight hundred pounds; and to that, and that only, had he to trust for
Mary's future maintenance.  How had it answered, then, this plan of
letting her be unknown to, and undreamed of, by, those who were as near
to her on her mother's side as he was on the father's?  On that side,
though there had been utter poverty, there was now absolute wealth.

But when he took her to himself, had he not rescued her from the very
depths of the lowest misery: from the degradation of the workhouse;
from the scorn of honest-born charity-children; from the lowest of the
world's low conditions?  Was she not now the apple of his eye, his one
great sovereign comfort--his pride, his happiness, his glory?  Was he to
make her over, to make any portion of her over to others, if, by doing
so, she might be able to share the wealth, as well as the coarse
manners and uncouth society of her at present unknown connexions?  He,
who had never worshipped wealth on his own behalf; he, who had scorned
the idol of the gold, and had ever been teaching her to scorn it; was
he now to show that his philosophy had all been false as soon as the 
temptation to do so was put in his way?

But yet, what man would marry this bastard child, without a sixpence,
and bring not only poverty, but ill blood also on his own children?  It
might be very well for him, Dr Thorne; for him whose career was made,
whose name, at any rate, was his own; for him who had a fixed
standing-ground in the world; it might be well for him to indulge in
large views of a philosophy antagonistic to the world's practice; but
had he a right to do it for his niece?  What man would marry a girl so
placed?  For those among whom she might have legitimately found a
level, education had now utterly unfitted her.  And then, he well knew
that she would never put out her hand in token of love to any one
without telling all she knew and all she surmised as to her own birth.

And that question of this evening; had it not been instigated by some
appeal on her part?  Was there not already within her breast some cause
for disquietude which had made her so pertinacious?  Why else had she
told him then, for the first time, that she did not know where to rank
herself?  If such an appeal had been made to her, it must have come
from young Frank Gresham.  What, in such case, would it behove him to 
do?  Should he pack up his all, his lancet-case, pestle and mortar, and
seek anew fresh ground in a new world, leaving behind a huge triumph to
those learned enemies of his, Fillgrave, Century, and Rerechild? Better
that than remain at Greshamsbury at the cost of the child's heart and
pride.

And so he walked slowly backwards and forwards through his garden,
meditating these things painfully enough.



CHAPTER VIII

MATRIMONIAL PROSPECTS

It will of course be remembered that Mary's interview with the other
girls at Greshamsbury took place some two or three days subsequently to
Frank's generous offer of his hand and heart. Mary had quite made up
her mind that the whole thing was to be regarded as a folly, and that
it was not to be spoken of to any one; but yet her heart was sore
enough.  She was full of pride, and yet she knew she must bow her neck
to the pride of others. Being, as she was herself, nameless, she could
not but feel a stern, unflinching antagonism, the antagonism of a
democrat, to the pretensions of others who were blessed with that of
which she had been deprived.  She had this feeling; and yet, of all the
things that she coveted, she most coveted that, for glorying in which,
she was determined to heap scorn on others. She said to herself, 
proudly, that God's handiwork was the inner man, the inner woman, the
naked creature animated by a living soul; that all other adjuncts were
but man's clothing for the creature; all others, whether stitched by
tailors or contrived by kings.  Was it not within her capacity to do as
nobly, to love as truly, to worship her God in heaven with as perfect a
faith, and her god on earth with as leal a troth, as though blood had
descended to her purely through scores of purely born progenitors?  So
to herself she spoke; and yet, as she said it, she knew that were she a
man, such a man as the heir of Greshamsbury should be, nothing would
tempt her to sully her children's blood by mating herself with any one
that was base born.  She felt that were she Augusta Gresham, no Mr
Moffat, let his wealth be what it might, should win her hand unless he
too could tell of family honours and a line of ancestors.

And so, with a mind at war with itself, she came forth armed to do
battle against the world's prejudices, those prejudices she herself
loved so well.

And was she thus to give up her old affections, her feminine loves,
because she found that she was a cousin to nobody?  Was she no longer
to pour out her heart to Beatrice Gresham with all the girlish
volubility of an equal?  Was she to be severed from Patience Oriel, and
banished--or rather was she to banish herself--from the free place she
had maintained in the various youthful female conclaves within that
parish of Greshamsbury?

Hitherto, what Mary Thorne would say, what Miss Thorne suggested in
such and such a matter, was quite as frequently asked as any opinion
from Augusta Gresham--quite as frequently, unless when it chanced that
any of the De Courcy girls were at the house.  Was this to be given
up?  These feelings had grown up among them since they were children, 
and had not hitherto been questioned among them.  Now they were
questioned by Mary Thorne.  Was she in fact to find that her position
had been a false one, and must be changed?

Such had been her feelings when she protested that she would not be
Augusta Gresham's bridesmaid, and offered to put her neck beneath
Beatrice's foot; when she drove the Lady Margaretta out of the room,
and gave her own opinion as to the proper grammatical construction of
the word humble; such also had been her feelings when she kept her hand
so rigidly to herself while Frank held the dining-room door open for
her to pass through.

'Patience Oriel,' said she to herself, 'can talk to him of her father
and mother: let Patience take his hand; let her talk to him;' and then,
not long afterwards, she saw that Patience did talk to him; and seeing
it, she walked along silent, among some of the old people, and with
much effort did prevent a tear from falling down her cheek.

But why was the tear in her eye?  Had she not proudly told Frank that
his love-making was nothing but a boy's silly rhapsody?  Had she not
said so while she had yet reason to hope that her blood was as good as
his own?  Had she not seen at a glance that his love tirade was worthy
of ridicule, and of no other notice?  And yet there was a tear now in
her eye because this boy, whom she had scolded from her, whose hand, 
offered in pure friendship, she had just refused, because he, so
rebuffed by her, had carried his fun and gallantry to one who would be
less cross to him!

She could hear as she was walking, that while Lady Margaretta was with
them, their voices were loud and merry; and her sharp ear could also
hear, when Lady Margaretta left them, that Frank's voice became low and
tender.  So she walked on, saying nothing, looking straight before her,
and by degrees separating herself from all the others.

The Greshamsbury grounds were on one side somewhat too closely hemmed
in by the village.  On this side was a path running the length of one
of the streets of the village; and far down the path, near the
extremity of the gardens, and near also to a wicket-gate which led out
into the village, and which could be opened from the inside, was a
seat, under a big yew-tree, from which, through a breach in the houses,
might be seen the parish church, standing in the park on the other
side.  Hither Mary walked alone, and here she seated herself,
determined to get rid of her tears and their traces before she again
showed herself to the world.

'I shall never be happy here again,' said she to herself; 'never.  I am
no longer one of them, and I cannot live among them unless I am so.'
And then an idea came across her mind that she hated Patience Oriel;
and then, instantly another idea followed--quick as such thoughts are
quick--that she did not hate Patience Oriel at all; that she liked her,
nay, loved her; that Patience Oriel was a sweet girl; and that she 
hoped the time would come when she might see her the lady of 
Greshamsbury.  And then the tear, which had been no whit controlled,
which indeed had now made itself master of her, came to a head, and,
bursting through the floodgates of the eye, came rolling down, and in
its fall, wetted her hand as it lay on her lap.  'What a fool! what an
idiot! what an empty-headed cowardly fool I am!' said she, springing
up from the bench on her feet.

As she did so, she heard voices close to her, at the little gate.  They
were those of her uncle and Frank Gresham.

'God bless you, Frank!' said the doctor, as he passed out of the
grounds.  'You will excuse a lecture, won't you, from so old a
friend?--though you are a man now, and discreet of course, by Act of
Parliament.'

'Indeed I will, doctor,' said Frank.  'I will excuse a longer lecture
than that from you.'

'At any rate it won't be tonight,' said the doctor, as he disappeared. 
'And if you see Mary, tell her that I am obliged to go; and that I will
send Janet down to fetch her.'

Now Janet was the doctor's ancient maid-servant.

Mary could not move on, without being perceived; she therefore stood
still till she heard the click of the door, and then began walking
rapidly back to the house by the path which had brought her thither. 
The moment, however, that she did so, she found that she was followed;
and in a very few moments Frank was alongside of her.

'Oh, Mary!' said he, calling to her, but not loudly, before he quite
overtook her, 'how odd that I should come across you just when I have a
message for you! and why are you all alone?'

Mary's first impulse was to reiterate her command to him to call her no
more by her Christian name; but her second impulse told her that such
an injunction at the present moment would not be prudent on her part. 
The traces of her tears were still there; and she well knew that a very
little, the slightest show of tenderness on his part, the slightest 
effort on her own to appear indifferent, would bring down more than one
other such intruder.  It would, moreover, be better for her to drop all
outward sign that she remembered what had taken place.  So long, then,
as he and she were at Greshamsbury together, he should call her Mary if
he pleased. He would soon be gone; and while he remained, she would
keep out of his way.

'Your uncle has been obliged to go away to see an old woman at
Silverbridge.'

'At Silverbridge! why, he won't be back all night.  Why could not the
old woman send for Dr Century?'

'I suppose she thought two old women could not get on well together.'

Mary could not help smiling.  She did not like her uncle going off so
late on such a journey; but it was always felt a triumph when he was
invited into the strongholds of the enemies.

'And Janet is to come over for you.  However, I told him it was quite
unnecessary to disturb another old woman, for that I should see you
home.'

'Oh, no, Mr Gresham; indeed you'll not do that.'

'Indeed, and indeed, I shall.'

'What! on this great day, when every lady is looking for you, and
talking of you.  I suppose you want to set the countess against me for
ever.  Think, too, how angry Lady Arabella will be if you are absent on
such and errand as this.'

'To hear you talk, Mary, one would think that you were going to
Silverbridge yourself.'

'Perhaps I am.'

'If I did not go with you, some of the other fellows would.  John, or
George--'

'Good gracious, Frank!  Fancy either of the Mr De Courceys walking home
with me!'

She had forgotten herself, and the strict propriety on which she had
resolved, in the impossibility of forgoing her little joke against the
De Courcy grandeur; she had forgotten herself, and had called him Frank
in her old, former, eager, free tone of voice; and then, remembering
she had done so, she drew herself up, but her lips, and determined to
be doubly on her guard in the future.

'Well, it shall be either one of them, or I,' said Frank: 'perhaps you
would prefer my cousin George to me?'

'I should prefer Janet to either, seeing that with her I should not
suffer the extreme nuisance of knowing that I was a bore.'

'A bore!  Mary, to me?'

'Yes, Mr Gresham, a bore to you.  Having to walk home through the mud
with village young ladies is boring.  All gentlemen feel it so.'

'There is no mud; if there were you would not be allowed to walk at
all.'

'Oh!  village young ladies never care for such things, though 
fashionable gentlemen do.'

'I would carry you home, Mary, if it would do you a service,' said
Frank, with considerable pathos in his voice.

'Oh, dear me!  pray do not, Mr Gresham.  I should not like it at all,'
said she: 'a wheelbarrow would be preferable to that.'

'Of course.  Anything would be preferable to my arm, I know.'

'Certainly; anything in the way of a conveyance.  If I were to act
baby; and you were to act nurse, it really would not be comfortable for
either of us.'

Frank Gresham felt disconcerted, though he hardly knew why.  He was
striving to say something tender to his lady-love; but every word that
he spoke she turned into joke.  Mary did not answer him coldly or
unkindly; but, nevertheless, he was displeased.  One does not like to
have one's little offerings of sentimental service turned into
burlesque when one is in love in earnest.  Mary's jokes had appeared so
easy too; they seemed to come from a heart so little troubled.  This,
also, was cause of vexation to Frank.  If he could but have known it
all, he would, perhaps, have been better pleased.

He determined not to be absolutely laughed out of his tenderness. When,
three days ago, he had been repulsed, he had gone away owning to
himself that he had been beaten; owning so much, but owning it with
great sorrow and much shame.  Since that he had come of age; since that
he had made speeches, and speeches had been made to him; since that he 
had gained courage by flirting with Patience Oriel.  No faint heart
ever won a fair lady, as he was well aware; he resolved, therefore,
that his heart should not be faint, and that he would see whether the
fair lady might not be won by becoming audacity.

'Mary,' said he, stopping in the path--for they were now near the spot
where it broke out upon the lawn, and they could already hear the
voices of the guests--'Mary, you are unkind to me.'

'I am not aware of it, Mr Gresham; but if I am, do not you retaliate. I
am weaker than you, and in your power; do not you, therefore, be unkind
to me.'

'You refused my hand just now,' continued he.  'Of all the people here
at Greshamsbury, you are the only one that has not wished me joy; the
only one--'

'I do wish you joy; I will wish you joy: there is my hand,' and she
frankly put out her ungloved hand.  'You are quite man enough to
understand me: there is my hand; I trust you use it only as it is meant
to be used.'

He took it in his hand and pressed it cordially, as he might have done
that of any other friend in such a case; and then--did not drop it as
he should have done.  He was not a St Anthony, and it was most
imprudent in Miss Thorne to subject him to such a temptation.

'Mary,' said he; 'dear Mary! dearest Mary! if you did but know how I
love you!'

As he said this, holding Miss Thorne's hand he stood on the pathway
with his back towards the lawn and house, and, therefore, did not at
first see his sister Augusta, who had just at that moment come upon
them.  Mary blushed up to her straw hat, and, with a quick jerk,
recovered her hand.  Augusta saw the motion, and Mary saw that Augusta
had seen it.

From my tedious way of telling it, the reader will be led to imagine
that the hand-squeezing had been protracted to a duration quite
incompatible with any objection to such an arrangement on the part of
the lady; but the fault is mine: in no part hers.  Were I possessed of
a quick spasmodic style of narrative, I should have been able to
include it all--Frank's misbehaviour, Mary's immediate anger, Augusta's
arrival, and keen, Argus-eyed inspection, and then Mary's subsequent
misery--in five words and half a dozen dashes and inverted commas.  The
thing would have been so told; for, to do Mary justice, she did not
leave her hand in Frank's a moment longer than she could help herself.

Frank, feeling the hand withdrawn, and hearing, when it was too late,
the step on the gravel, turned sharply round.  'Oh, it's you, is it,
Augusta?  Well, what do you want?'

Augusta was not naturally very ill-natured, seeing that in her veins
the high De Courcy blood was somewhat tempered by an admixture of the
Gresham attributes; nor was she predisposed to make her brother her
enemy by publishing to the world any of his little tender peccadilloes;
but she could not but bethink herself of what her aunt had been saying
as to the danger of any such encounters as that she just now had
beheld; she could not but start at seeing her brother thus, on the very
brink of the precipice of which the countess had specially forewarned
her mother.  She, Augusta, was, as she well knew, doing her duty by her
family by marrying a tailor's son for whom she did not care a chip, 
seeing that the tailor's son was possessed of untold wealth.  Now when
one member of a household is making a struggle for a family, it is
painful to see the benefit of that struggle negatived by the folly of
another member.  The future Mrs Moffat did feel aggrieved by the
fatuity of the young heir, and, consequently, took upon herself to look
as much like her Aunt De Courcy as she could do.

'Well, what is it?' said Frank, looking rather disgusted.  'What makes
you stick your chin up and look in that way?' Frank had hitherto been
rather a despot among his sisters, and forgot that the eldest of them
was now passing altogether from under his sway to that of the tailor's
son.

'Frank,' said Augusta, in a tone of voice which did honour to the great
lessons she had lately received.  'Aunt De Courcy wants to see you
immediately in the small drawing-room;' and, as she said so, she
resolved to say a few words of advice to Miss Thorne as soon as her
brother should have left them.

'In the small drawing-room, does she?  Well, Mary, we may as well go
together, for I suppose it is tea-time now.'

'You had better go at once, Frank,' said Augusta; 'the countess will be
angry if you keep her waiting.  She has been expecting you these twenty
minutes.  Mary Thorne and I can return together.'

There was something in the tone in which the word, 'Mary Thorne', were
uttered, which made Mary at once draw herself up. 'I hope,' said she,
'that Mary Thorne will never be a hindrance to either of you.'

Frank's ear had also perceived that there was something in the tone of
his sister's voice not boding comfort to Mary; he perceived that the De
Courcy blood in Augusta's veins was already rebelling against the
doctor's niece on his part, though it had condescended to submit itself
to the tailor's son on her own part.

'Well, I am going,' said he; 'but look here Augusta, if you say one
word of Mary--'

Oh, Frank!  Frank! you boy, you very boy! you goose, you silly goose! 
Is that the way you make love, desiring one girl not to tell another,
as though you were three children, tearing your frocks and trousers in
getting through the same hedge together? Oh, Frank! Frank! you, the
full-blown heir of Greshamsbury?  You, a man already endowed with a
man's discretion?  You, the forward rider, that did but now threaten
young Harry Baker and the Honourable John to eclipse them by prowess in
the field?  You, of age?  Why, thou canst not as yet have left thy
mother's apron-string.

'If you say one word of Mary--'

So far had he got in his injunction to his sister, but further than
that, in such a case, was he never destined to proceed.  Mary's
indignation flashed upon him, striking him dumb long before the sound
of her voice reached his ears; and yet she spoke as quick as the words
would come to her call, and somewhat loudly too.

'Say one word of Mary, Mr Gresham!  And why should she not say as many
words of Mary as she may please?  I must tell you all now, Augusta! and
I must also beg you not to be silent for my sake.  As far as I am
concerned, tell it to whom you please.  This was the second time your
brother--'

'Mary, Mary,' said Frank, deprecating her loquacity.

'I beg your pardon, Mr Gresham; you have made it necessary that I
should tell your sister all.  He has now twice thought it well to amuse
himself by saying to me words which it was ill-natured in him to speak,
and--'

'Ill-natured, Mary!'

'Ill-natured in him to speak,' continued Mary, 'and to which it would
be absurd for me to listen.  He probably does the same to others,' she
added, being unable in heart to forget that sharpest of her wounds,
that flirtation of his with Patience Oriel; 'but to me it is almost
cruel.  Another girl might laugh at him, or listen to him, as he would
choose; but I can do neither.  I shall now keep away from Greshamsbury,
at any rate till he has left it; and, Augusta, I can only beg you to
understand, that, as far as I am concerned, there is nothing which may
not be told to all the world.'

And, so saying, she walked on a little in advance of them, as proud as
a queen.  Had Lady de Courcy herself met her at this moment, she would
almost have felt herself forced to shrink out of the pathway.  'Not say
a word of me!' she repeated to herself, but still out loud.  'No word
need be left unsaid on my account; none, none.'

Augusta followed her, dumfounded at her indignation; and Frank also
followed, but not in silence.  When his first surprise at Mary's great
anger was over, he felt himself called upon to say some word that might
exonerate his lady-love; and some word also of protestation as to his
own purpose.

'There is nothing to be told, at least of Mary,' he said, speaking to
his sister; 'but of me, you may tell this, if you choose to disoblige
your brother--that I love Mary Thorne with all my heart; and that I will
never love anyone else.'

By this time they had reached the lawn, and Mary was able to turn away
from the path which led up to the house.  As she left them she said in
a voice, now low enough, 'I cannot prevent him from talking nonsense,
Augusta; but you will bear me witness, that I do not willingly hear
it.'  And, so saying, she started off almost in a run towards the
distant part of the gardens, in which she saw Beatrice.

Frank, as he walked up to the house with his sister, endeavoured to
induce her to give him a promise that she would tell no tales as to
what she had heard and seen.

'Of course, Frank, it must be all nonsense,' she had said; 'and you
shouldn't amuse yourself in such a way.'

'Well, but, Guss, come, we have always been friends; don't let us
quarrel just when you are going to be married.'  But Augusta would make
no promise.

Frank, when he reached the house, found the countess waiting for him,
sitting in the little drawing-room by herself,--somewhat impatiently. 
As he entered he became aware that there was some peculiar gravity
attached to the coming interview.  Three persons, his mother, one of
his younger sisters, and the Lady Amelia, each stopped him to let him 
know that the countess was waiting; and he perceived that a sort of
guard was kept upon the door to save her ladyship from any undesirable
intrusion.

The countess frowned at the moment of his entrance, but soon smoothed
her brow, and invited him to take a chair ready prepared for him
opposite to the elbow of the sofa on which she was leaning.  She had a
small table before her, on which was her teacup, so that she was able
to preach at him nearly as well as though she had been ensconced in a
pulpit.

'My dear Frank,' said she, in a voice thoroughly suitable to the
importance of the communication, 'you have to-day come of age.'

Frank remarked that he understood that such was the case, and added
that 'that was the reason for all the fuss.'

'Yes; you have to-day come of age.  Perhaps I should have been glad to
see such an occasion noticed at Greshamsbury with some more suitable
signs of rejoicing.'

'Oh, aunt!  I think we did it all very well.'

'Greshamsbury, Frank, is, or at any rate ought to be, the seat of the
first commoner in Barsetshire.

'Well; so it is.  I am quite sure there isn't a better fellow than
father anywhere in the county.'

The countess sighed.  Her opinion of the poor squire was very different
from Frank's.  'It is no use now,' said she, 'looking back to that
which cannot be cured.  The first commoner in Barsetshire should hold a
position--I will not of course say equal to that of a peer.'

'Oh dear no; of course not,' said Frank; and a bystander might have
thought that there was a touch of satire in his tone.

'No, not equal to that of a peer; but still of very paramount 
importance.  Of course my first ambition is bound up in Porlock.'

'Of course,' said Frank, thinking how very weak was the staff on which
his aunt's ambition rested; for Lord Porlock's youthful career had not
been such as to give unmitigated satisfaction to his parents.

'Is bound up in Porlock:' and then the countess plumed herself; but the
mother sighed.  'And next to Porlock, my anxiety is about you.'

'Upon my honour, aunt, I am very much obliged.  I shall be all right,
you know.'

'Greshamsbury, my dear boy, is not now what it used to be.'

'Isn't it?' asked Frank.

'No, Frank; by no means.  I do not wish to say a word against your
father.  It may, perhaps have been his misfortune, rather than his
fault--'

'She is always down on the governor; always,' said Frank to himself;
resolving to stick bravely to the side of the house to which he had
elected to belong.

'But there is the fact, Frank, too plain to us all; Greshamsbury is not
what it was.  It is your duty to restore it to its former importance.'

'My duty!' said Frank, rather puzzled.

'Yes, Frank, your duty.  It all depends on you now.  Of course you know
that your father owes a great deal of money.'

Frank muttered something.  Tidings had in some shape reached his ear
that his father was not comfortably circumstances as regards money.

'And then, he has sold Boxall Hill.  It cannot be expected that Boxall
Hill shall be purchased, as some horrid man, a railway-maker, I
believe--'

'Yes; that's Scatcherd.'

'Well, he has built a house there, I'm told; so I presume that it
cannot be bought back: but it will be your duty, Frank, to pay all the
debts that there are on the property, and to purchase what, at any
rate, will be equal to Boxall Hill.'

Frank opened his eyes wide and stared at his aunt, as though doubting
much whether or no she were in her right mind.  He pay off the family
debts!  He buy up property of four thousand pounds a year!  He
remained, however, quite quiet, waiting the elucidation of the mystery.

'Frank, of course you understand me.'

Frank was obliged to declare, that just at the present moment he did
not find his aunt so clear as usual.

'You have but one line of conduct left you, Frank: your position, as
heir to Greshamsbury, is a good one; but your father has unfortunately
so hampered you with regard to money, that unless you set the matter
right yourself, you can never enjoy that position.  Of course you must
marry money.'

'Marry money!' said he, considering for the first time that in all
probability Mary Thorne's fortune would not be extensive. 'Marry
money!'

'Yes, Frank.  I know no man whose position so imperatively demands it;
and luckily for you, no man can have more facility for doing so.  In
the first place you are very handsome.'

Frank blushed like a girl of sixteen.

'And then, as the matter is made plain to you at so early an age, you
are not of course hampered by any indiscreet tie; by any absurd
engagement.'

Frank blushed again; and then saying to himself, 'How much the old girl
knows about it!' felt a little proud of his passion for Mary Thorne,
and of the declaration he had made to her.

'And your connexion with Courcy Castle,' continued the countess, now
carrying up the list of Frank's advantages to its greatest climax,
'will make the matter so easy for you, that really, you will hardly
have any difficulty.'

Frank could not but say how much obliged he felt to Courcy Castle and
its inmates.

'Of course I would not wish to interfere with you in any underhand way,
Frank; but I will tell you what has occurred to me.  You have heard,
probably, of Miss Dunstable?'

'The daughter of the ointment of Lebanon man?'

'And of course you know that her fortune is immense,' continued the
countess, not deigning to notice her nephew's allusion to the
ointment.  'Quite immense when compared with the wants and any position
of any commoner.  Now she is coming to Courcy Castle, and I wish you to
come and meet her.'

'But, aunt, just at this moment I have to read for my degree like
anything.  I go up, you know, to Oxford.'

'Degree!' said the countess.  'Why, Frank, I am talking to you of your
prospects in life, of your future position, of that on which everything
hangs, and you tell me of your degree!'

Frank, however, obstinately persisted that he must take his degree, and
that he should commence reading hard at six a.m. tomorrow morning.

'You can read just as well at Courcy Castle.  Miss Dunstable will not
interfere with that,' said his aunt, who knew the expediency of
yielding occasionally; 'but I must beg you will come over and meet
her.  You will find her a most charming young woman, remarkably well
educated I am told, and--'

'How old is she?' asked Frank.

'I really cannot say exactly,' said the countess; 'but it is not, I
imagine, a matter of much moment.'

'Is she thirty?' asked Frank, who looked upon an unmarried woman of
that age as quite an old maid.

'I dare say she may be about that age,' said the countess, who regarded
the subject from a very different point of view.

'Thirty!' said Frank out loud, but speaking, nevertheless as though to
himself.

'It is a matter of no moment,' said his aunt, almost angrily. 'When a
subject itself is of such vital importance, objections of no real
weight should not be brought into view. If you wish to hold up your
head in the country; if you wish to represent your county in
Parliament, as has been done by your father, your grandfather, and your
great-grandfathers; if you wish to keep a house over your head, and to
leave Greshamsbury to your son after you, you must marry money.  What
does it signify whether Miss Dunstable be twenty-eight or thirty?  She
has got money; and if you marry her, you may then consider that your
position in life is made.'

Frank was astonished at his aunt's eloquence; but, in spite of that
eloquence, he made up his mind that he would not marry Miss Dunstable. 
How could he, indeed, seeing that his troth was already plighted to
Mary Thorne in the presence of his sister?  This circumstance, however,
he did not choose to plead to his aunt, so he recapitulated any other
objections that presented themselves to his mind.

In the first place, he was so anxious about his degree that he could
not think of marrying at present; then he suggested that it might be
better to postpone the question till the season's hunting should be
over; he declared that he could not visit Courcy Castle till he got a
new suit of clothes home from the tailor; and ultimately remembered
that he had a particular engagement to go fly-fishing with Mr Oriel on
that day week.

None, however, of these valid reasons were sufficiently potent to turn
the countess from her point.

'Nonsense, Frank,' said she, 'I wonder that you can talk of fly-fishing
when the property of Greshamsbury is at stake.  You will go with
Augusta and myself to Courcy Castle to-morrow.'

'To-morrow, aunt!' he said, in the tone which a condemned criminal
might make his ejaculation on hearing that a very near day had been
named for his execution.  'To-morrow!'

'Yes, we return to-morrow, and shall be happy to have your company.  My
friends, including Miss Dunstable, come on Thursday.  I am quite sure
you will like Miss Dunstable.  I have settled all that with your
mother, so we need say nothing further about it.  And now, good-night,
Frank.'

Frank, finding that there was nothing more to be said, took his
departure, and went out to look for Mary.  But Mary had gone home with
Janet half an hour since, so he betook himself to his sister Beatrice.

'Beatrice,' said he, 'I am to go to Courcy Castle to-morrow.'

'So I heard mamma say.'

'Well; I only came of age to-day, and I will not begin by running
counter to them.  But I tell you what, I won't stay above a week at
Courcy Castle for all the De Courcys in Barsetshire.  Tell me,
Beatrice, did you ever hear of a Miss Dunstable?'



CHAPTER IX

SIR ROGER SCATCHERD

Enough has been said in this