 narrative to explain to the reader that
Roger Scatcherd, who was whilom a drunken stone-mason in Barchester,
and who had been so prompt to avenge the injury done to his sister, had
become a great man in the world.  He had become a contractor, first for
little things, such as half a mile or so of a railway embankment, or
three or four canal bridges, and then a contractor for great things,
such as Government hospitals, locks, docks, and quays, and had latterly
had in his hands the making of whole lines of railway.

He had been occasionally in partnership with one man for one thing, and
then with another for another; but had, on the whole, kept his
interests to himself, and now at the time of our story, he was a very
rich man.

And he had acquired more than wealth.  There had been a time when the
Government wanted the immediate performance of some extraordinary piece
of work, and Roger Scatcherd had been the man to do it.  There had been
some extremely necessary bit of a railway to be made in half the time
that such work would properly demand, some speculation to be incurred
requiring great means and courage as well, and Roger Scatcherd had been
found to be the man for the time.  He was then elevated for the moment
to the dizzy pinnacle of a newspaper hero, and became one of those
'whom the king delighteth to honour'.  He went up one day to kiss Her
Majesty's hand, and come down to his new grand house at Boxall Hill,
Sir Roger Scatcherd, Bart.

'And now, my lady,' said he, when he explained to his wife the high
state to which she had been called by his exertions and the Queen's
prerogative, 'let's have a bit of dinner, and a drop of som'at hot.' 
Now the drop of som'at hot signified a dose of alcohol sufficient to
send three ordinary men very drunk to bed.

While conquering the world Roger Scatcherd had not conquered his old
bad habits.  Indeed, he was the same man at all points that he had been
when formerly seen about the streets of Barchester with his
stone-mason's apron tucked up round his waist.  The apron he had
abandoned, but not the heavy prominent thoughtful brow, with the wildly
flashing eye beneath it.  He was still the same good companion, and
still also the same hard-working hero.  In this only had he changed,
that now he would work, and some said equally well, whether he were
drunk or sober.  Those who were mostly inclined to make a miracle of
him--and there was a school of worshippers ready to adore him as their
idea of a divine, superhuman, miracle-moving, inspired prophet--declared
that his wondrous work was best done, his calculations most quickly and
most truly made, that he saw with most accurate eye into the
far-distant balance of profit and loss, when he was under the influence
of the rosy god.  To these worshippers his breakings-out, as his
periods of intemperance were called in his own set, were his moments of
peculiar inspiration--his divine frenzies, in which he communicated most
closely with those deities who preside over trade transactions; his
Eleusinian mysteries, to approach him in which was permitted only a few
of the most favoured.

'Scatcherd has been drunk this week past,' they would say one to
another, when the moment came at which it was to be decided whose offer
should be accepted for constructing a harbour to hold all the commerce
of Lancashire, or to make a railway from Bombay to Canton.  'Scatcherd
has been drunk this week past; I am told that he has taken over three 
gallons of brandy.'  And then they felt sure that none but Scatcherd
would be called upon to construct the dock or make the railway.

But be this as it may, be it true or false that Sir Roger was most
efficacious when in his cups, there can be no doubt that he could not
wallow for a week in brandy, six or seven times every year, without in
a great measure injuring, and permanently injuring, the outward man. 
Whatever immediate effect such symposiums might have on the inner mind-
symposiums indeed they were not; posiums I will call them, if I may be
allowed; for in latter life, when he drank heavily, he drank
alone--however little for evil, or however much for good the working of
his brain might be affected, his body suffered greatly.  It was not
that he became feeble or emaciated, old-looking or inactive, that his
hand shook, or that his eye was watery; but that in the moments of his 
intemperance his life was often worth a day's purchase.  The frame
which God had given to him was powerful beyond the power of ordinary
men; powerful to act in spite of these violent perturbations; powerful
to repress and conquer the qualms and headaches and inward sicknesses
to which the votaries of Bacchus are ordinarily subject; but this power
was not without its limit. If encroached on too far, it would break and
fall and come asunder, and then the strong man would at once become a
corpse.

Scatcherd had but one friend in the world.  And, indeed, this friend
was not friend in the ordinary acceptance of the word. He neither ate
with him nor drank with him, nor even frequently talked with him. Their
pursuits in life were wide asunder.  Their tastes were all different. 
The society in which they moved very seldom came together.  Scatcherd
had nothing in unison with this solitary friend; but he trusted him, 
and he trusted no other living creature in God's earth.

He trusted this man; but even him he did not trust thoroughly; not at
least as one friend should trust another. He believed that this man
would not rob him; would probably not lie to him; would not endeavour
to make money of him; would not count him up or speculate on him, and
make out a balance of profit and loss; and, therefore, he determined to
use him.  But he put no trust whatever in his friend's counsel, in his
modes of thought; none in his theory, and none in his practice.  He
disliked his friend's counsel, and, in fact, disliked his society, for
his friend was somewhat apt to speak to him in a manner approaching to
severity.  Now Roger Scatcherd had done many things in the world, and
made much money; whereas his friend had done but few things, and made
no money.  It was not to be endured that the practical, efficient man
should be taken to task by the man who proved himself to be neither
practical nor efficient; not to be endured, certainly, by Roger
Scatcherd, who looked on men of his own class as the men of the day,
and on himself as by no means the least among them.

The friend was our friend Dr Thorne.

The doctor's first acquaintance with Scatcherd has been already
explained.  He was necessarily thrown into communication with the man
at the time of the trial, and Scatcherd then had not only sufficient
sense, but sufficient feeling also to know that the doctor behaved very
well.  This communication had in different ways been kept up between 
them.  Soon after the trial Scatcherd had begun to rise, and his first
savings had been entrusted to the doctor's care.  This had been the
beginning of a pecuniary connexion which had never wholly ceased, and
which had led to the purchase of Boxall Hill, and to the loan of large
sums of money to the squire.

In another way also there had been a close alliance between them, and
one not always of a very pleasant description.  The doctor was, and
long had been, Sir Roger's medical attendant, and, in his unceasing
attempts to rescue the drunkard from the fate which was so much to be
dreaded, he not unfrequently was driven to quarrel with his patient.

One thing further must be told of Sir Roger.  In politics he was as
violent a Radical as ever, and was very anxious to obtain a position in
which he could bring his violence to bear. With this view he was about
to contest his native borough of Barchester, in the hope of being
returned in opposition to the De Courcy candidate; and with this object
he had now come down to Boxall Hill.

Nor were his claims to sit for Barchester such as could be despised. If
money were to be of no avail, he had plenty of it, and was prepared to
spend it; whereas, rumour said that Mr Moffat was equally determined to
do nothing so foolish.  Then again, Sir Roger had a sort of rough
eloquence, and was bold to address the men of Barchester in language
that would come home to their hearts, in words that would endear him to
one party while they made him offensively odious to the other; but Mr
Moffat could make neither friends nor enemies by his eloquence. The
Barchester roughs called him a dumb dog that could not bark, and
sometimes sarcastically added that neither could he bite.  The De
Courcy interest, however, was at his back, and he had also the
advantage of possession.  Sir Roger, therefore, knew that the battle
was not to be won without a struggle.

Dr Thorne got safely back from Silverbridge that evening, and found
Mary waiting to give him his tea.  He had been called there to a
consultation with Dr Century, that amiable old gentleman having so far
fallen away from the high Fillgrave tenets as to consent to the
occasional endurance of such degradation.

The next morning he breakfasted early, and, having mounted his strong
iron-grey cob, started for Boxall Hill.  Not only had he there to
negotiate the squire's further loan, but also to exercise his medical
skill.  Sir Roger having been declared contractor for cutting a canal
from sea to sea, through the isthmus of Panama, had been making a week
of it; and the result was that Lady Scatcherd had written rather 
peremptorily to her husband's medical friend.

The doctor consequently trotted off to Boxall Hill on his iron-grey
cob.  Among his other merits was that of being a good horseman, and he
did much of his work on horseback.  The fact that he occasionally took
a day with the East Barsetshires, and that when he did so he thoroughly
enjoyed it, had probably not failed to add something to the strength of
the squire's friendship.

'Well, my lady, how is he?  Not much the matter, I hope?' said the
doctor, as he shook hands with the titled mistress of Boxall Hill in a
small breakfast-parlour in the rear of the house.  The showrooms of
Boxall Hill were furnished most magnificently, but they were set apart
for company; and as the company never came--seeing that they were never
invited--the grand rooms and the grand furniture were not of much 
material use to Lady Scatcherd.

'Indeed then, doctor, he's just bad enough,' said her ladyship, not in
a very happy tone of voice; 'just bad enough.  There's been some'at the
back of his head, rapping, and rapping, and rapping; and if you don't
do something, I'm thinking it will rap him too hard yet.'

'Is he in bed?'

'Why, yes, he is in bed; for when he was first took he couldn't very
well help hisself, so we put him to bed.  And then, he don't seem to be
quite right yet about the legs, so he hasn't got up; but he's got that
Winterbones with him to write for him, and when Winterbones is there,
Scatcherd might as well be up for any good that bed'll do him.'

Mr Winterbones was confidential clerk to Sir Roger.  That is to say, he
was a writing-machine of which Sir Roger made use to do certain work
which could not well be adjusted without some contrivance.  He was a
little, withered, dissipated, broken-down man, whom gin and poverty had
nearly burnt to a cinder, and dried to an ash.  Mind he had none left,
nor care for earthly things, except the smallest modicum of substantial
food, and the largest allowance of liquid sustenance.  All that he had
ever known he had forgotten, except how to count up figures and to
write: the results of his counting and his writing never stayed with
him from one hour to another; nay, not from one folio to another.  Let 
him, however, be adequately screwed up with gin, and adequately screwed
down by the presence of his master, and then no amount of counting and
writing would be too much for him.  This was Mr Winterbones,
confidential clerk to the great Sir Roger Scatcherd.

'We must send Winterbones away, I take it,' said the doctor.

'Indeed, doctor, I wish you would.  I wish you'd send him to Bath, or
anywhere else out of the way.  There is Scatcherd, he takes brandy; and
there is Winterbones, he takes gin; and it'd puzzle a woman to say
which is worst, master or man.'

It will seem from this, that Lady Scatcherd and the doctor were on very
familiar terms as regarded her little domestic inconveniences.

'Tell Sir Roger I am here, will you?' said the doctor.

'You'll take a drop of sherry before you go up?' said the lady.

'Not a drop, thank you,' said the doctor.

'Or, perhaps a little cordial?'

'Not of drop of anything, thank you; I never do, you know.'

'Just a thimbleful of this?' said the lady, producing from some recess
under a sideboard a bottle of brandy; 'just a thimbleful?  It's what he
takes himself.'

When Lady Scatcherd found that even this argument failed, she led the
way to the great man's bedroom.

'Well doctor!  well doctor!, well, doctor!' was the greeting with which
our son of Galen was saluted some time before he entered the
sick-room.  His approaching step was heard, and thus the ci-devant
Barchester stone-mason saluted his coming friend.  The voice was loud
and powerful, but not clear and sonorous.  What voice that is nurtured
on brandy can ever be clear?  It had about it a peculiar huskiness, a
dissipated guttural tone, which Thorne immediately recognized, and 
recognized as being more marked, more guttural, and more husky than
heretofore.

'So you've smelt me out, have you, and come for your fee?  Ha! ha! ha! 
Well, I have had a sharpish bout of it, as her ladyship there no doubt
has told you.  Let her alone to make the worst of it.  But, you see,
you're too late, man.  I've bilked the old gentleman again without
troubling you.'

'Anyway, I'm glad you're something better, Scatcherd.'

'Something!  I don't know what you call something.  I never was better
in my life.  Ask Winterbones here.'

'Indeed, now, Scatcherd, you ain't; you're bad enough if you only knew
it.  And as for Winterbones, he has no business here up in your
bedroom, which stinks of gin so, it does.  Don't you believe him,
doctor; he ain't well, nor yet nigh well.'

Winterbones, when the above ill-natured allusion was made to the aroma
coming from his libations, might be seen to deposit surreptitiously
beneath the little table at which he sat, the cup with which he had
performed them.

The doctor, in the meantime, had taken Sir Roger's hand on the pretext
of feeling his pulse, but was drawing quite as much information from
the touch of the sick man's skin, and the look of the sick man's eye.

'I think Mr Winterbones had better go back to the London office,' said
he.  'Lady Scatcherd will be your best clerk for some time, Sir Roger.'

'Then I'll be d--- if Mr Winterbones does anything of the kind,' said
he; 'so there's an end of that.'

'Very well,' said the doctor.  'A man can die but once.  It is my duty
to suggest measures for putting off the ceremony as long as possible. 
Perhaps, however, you may wish to hasten it.'

'Well, I am not anxious about it, one way or the other,' said 
Scatcherd.  And as he spoke there came a fierce gleam from his eye,
which seemed to say--'If that's the bugbear with which you wish to
frighten me, you will be mistaken.'

'Now, doctor, don't let him talk that way, don't,' said Lady Scatcherd,
with her handkerchief to her eyes.

'Now, my lady, do you cut it; cut at once,' said Sir Roger, turning
hastily round to his better-half; and his better-half, knowing that
the province of a woman is to obey, did cut it.  But as she went she
gave the doctor a pull by the coat's sleeve, so that thereby his
healing faculties might be sharpened to the very utmost.

'The best woman in the world, doctor; the very best,' said he, as the
door closed behind the wife of his bosom.

'I'm sure of it,' said the doctor.

'Yes, till you find a better one,' said Scatcherd.  'Ha! ha! ha! but
for good or bad, there are some things which a woman can't understand,
and some things which she ought not to be let to understand.'

'It's natural she should be anxious about your health, you know.'

'I don't know that,' said the contractor.  'She'll be very well off. 
All that whining won't keep a man alive, at any rate.'

There was a pause, during which the doctor continued his medical
examination.  To this the patient submitted with a bad grace; but still
he did submit.

'We must turn over a new leaf, Sir Roger; indeed we must.'

'Bother,' said Sir Roger.

'Well, Scatcherd; I must do my duty to you, whether you like it or
not.'

'That is to say, I am to pay you for trying to frighten me.'

'No human nature can stand such shocks as those much longer.'

'Winterbones,' said the contractor, turning to his clerk, 'go down, go
down, I say; but don't be out of the way.  If you go to the
public-house, by G-- you may stay there for me.  When I take a
drop,--that is if I ever do, it does not stand in the way of work.'  So
Mr Winterbones, picking up his cup again, and concealing it in some way
beneath his coat flap, retreated out of the room, and the two friends
were alone.

'Scatcherd,' said the doctor, 'you have been as near your God, as any
man ever was who afterwards ate and drank in this world.'

'Have I, now?' said the railway here, apparently somewhat startled.

'Indeed you have; indeed you have.'

'And now I'm all right again?'

'All right!  How can you be all right, when you know that your limbs
refuse to carry you?   All right! why the blood is still beating round
you brain with a violence that would destroy any other brain but
yours.'

'Ha!  ha!  ha!,' laughed Scatcherd.  He was very proud of thinking
himself to be differently organized from other men. 'Ha! ha! ha!  Well
and what am I to do now?'

The whole of the doctor's prescription we will not give at length.  To
some of his ordinances Sir Roger promised obedience; to others he
objected violently, and to one or two he flatly refused to listen.  The
great stumbling-block was this, that total abstinence from business for
two weeks was enjoined; and that it was impossible, so Sir Roger said,
that he should abstain for two days.

'If you work,' said the doctor, 'in your present state, you will
certainly have recourse to the stimulus of drink; and if you drink,
most assuredly will die.'

'Stimulus!  Why do you think I can't work without Dutch courage?'

'Scatcherd, I know that there is brandy in this room at the moment, and
that you have been taking it within these two hours.'

'You smell that fellow's gin,' said Scatcherd.

'I feel the alcohol working within your veins,' said the doctor, who
still had his hand on his patient's arm.

Sir Roger turned himself roughly in the bed so as to get away from his
Mentor, and then he began to threaten in his turn.

'I'll tell you what it is, doctor; I've made up my mind, and I'll do
it.  I'll send for Fillgrave.'

'Very well,' said he of Greshamsbury, 'send for Fillgrave.  Your case
is one in which even he can hardly go wrong.'

'You think you can hector me, and do as you like because you had me
under your thumb in other days.  You're a very good fellow, Thorne, but
I ain't sure that you are the best doctor in all England.'

'You may be sure I am not; you may take me for the worst if you will. 
But while I am here as your medical adviser, I can only tell you the
truth to the best of my thinking.  Now the truth is, that another bout
of drinking will in all probability kill you; and any recourse to
stimulus in your present condition may do so.'

'I'll send for Fillgrave--'

'Well, send for Fillgrave, only do it at once.  Believe me at any rate
in this, that whatever you do, you should do at once. Oblige me in
this; let Lady Scatcherd take away that brandy bottle till Dr Fillgrave
comes.'

'I'm d--- if I do.  Do you think I can't have a bottle of brandy in my
room without swigging?'

'I think you'll be less likely to swig if you can't get at it.'

Sir Roger made another angry turn in his bed as well as his 
half-paralysed limbs would let him; and then, after a few moments'
peace, renewed his threats with increased violence.

'Yes; I'll have Fillgrave over here.  If a man be ill, really ill, he
should have the best advice he can get.  I'll have Fillgrave, and I'll
have that other fellow from Silverbridge to meet him.  What's his
name?--Century.'

The doctor turned his head away; for though the occasion was serious,
he could not help smiling at the malicious vengeance with which his
friend proposed to gratify himself.

'I will; and Rerechild too.  What's the expense?  I suppose five or six
pounds apiece will do it; eh, Thorne?'

'Oh, yes; that will be liberal I should say.  But, Sir Roger, will you
allow me to suggest what you ought to do?  I don't know how far you may
be joking--'

'Joking!' shouted the baronet; 'you tell a man he's dying and joking in
the same breath.  You'll find I'm not joking.'

'Well I dare say not.  But if you have not full confidence in me--'

'I have no confidence in you at all.'

'Then why not send to London?  Expense is no object to you.'

'It is an object; a great object.'

'Nonsense!  Send to London for Sir Omicron Pie: send for some man whom
you will really trust when you see him.

'There's not one of the lot I'd trust as soon as Fillgrave.  I've known
Fillgrave all my life and I trust him.  I'll send for Fillgrave and put
my case in his hands.  If any one can do anything for me, Fillgrave is
the man.'

'Then in God's name send for Fillgrave,' said the doctor.  'And now,
good-bye, Scatcherd; and as you do send for him, give him a fair
chance.  Do not destroy yourself by more brandy before he comes.'

'That's my affair, and his; not yours,' said the patient.

'So be it; give me your hand, at any rate, before I go.  I wish you
well through it, and when you are well, I'll come and see you.'

'Good-bye--good-bye; and look here, Thorne, you'll be talking to Lady
Scatcherd downstairs I know; now, no nonsense.  You understand me, eh?
no nonsense.'



CHAPTER X

SIR ROGER'S WILL

Dr Thorne left the room and went downstairs, being fully aware that he
could not leave the house without having some communication with Lady
Scatcherd.  He was not sooner within the passage than he heard the sick
man's bell ring violently; and then the servant, passing him on the
staircase, received orders to send a mounted messenger immediately to
Barchester. Dr Fillgrave was to be summoned to come as quickly as 
possible to the sick man's room, and Mr Winterbones was to be sent up
to write the note.

Sir Roger was quite right in supposing that there would be some words
between the doctor and her ladyship.  How, indeed, was the doctor to
get out of the house without such, let him wish it ever so much?  There
were words; and these were protracted, while the doctor's cob was being
ordered round, till very many were uttered which the contractor would 
probably have regarded as nonsense.

Lady Scatcherd was no fit associate for the wives of English 
baronets;--was no doubt by education and manners much better fitted to
sit in their servants' halls; but not on that account was she a bad
wife or a bad woman.  She was painfully, fearfully, anxious for that
husband of hers, whom she honoured and worshipped, as it behoved her to
do, above all other men. She was fearfully anxious as to his life, and 
faithfully believed, that if any man could prolong it, it was that old
and faithful friend whom she had known to be true to her lord since
their early married troubles.

When, therefore, she found that she had been dismissed, and that a
stranger was to be sent for in his place, her heart sank below within
her.

'But, doctor,' she said, with her apron up to her eyes, 'you ain't
going to leave him, are you?'

Dr Thorne did not find it easy to explain to her ladyship that medical
etiquette would not permit him to remain in attendance on her husband
after he had been dismissed and another physician called in his place.

'Etiquette!' said she, crying.  'What's etiquette to do with it when a
man is a-killing hisself with brandy?'

'Fillgrave will forbid that quite as strongly as I can do.'

'Fillgrave!' said she.  'Fiddlesticks!  Fillgrave, indeed!'

Dr Thorne could almost have embraced her for the strong feeling of
thorough confidence on the one side, and thorough distrust on the
other, which she contrived to throw into those few words.

'I'll tell you what, doctor; I won't let that messenger go.  I'll bear
the brunt of it.  He can't do much now he ain't up, you know.  I'll
stop the boy; we won't have no Fillgrave here.'

This, however, was a step to which Dr Thorne would not assent. He
endeavoured to explain to the anxious wife, that after what had passed
he could not tender his medical services till they were again asked
for.

'But you can slip in as a friend, you know; and then by degrees you can
come round him, eh?  can't you now, doctor?  And as to payment--'

All that Dr Thorne said on the subject may easily be imagined. And in
this way, and in partaking of the lunch which was forced upon him, an
hour had nearly passed between his leaving Sir Roger's bedroom and
putting his foot in the stirrup.  But no sooner had the cob begun to
move on the gravel-sweep before the house than one of the upper windows
opened, and the doctor was summoned to another conference with the sick
man.

'He says you are to come back, whether or no,' said Mr Winterbones,
screeching out of the window, and putting all his emphasis on the last
words.

'Thorne!  Thorne!  Thorne!' shouted the sick man from his sick-bed, so
loudly that the doctor heard him, seated as he was on horseback out
before the house.

'You're to come back, whether or no,' repeated Winterbones, with more
emphasis, evidently conceiving that there was a strength of injunction
in that 'whether or no' which would be found quite invincible.

Whether actuated by these magic words, or by some internal process of
thought, we will not say; but the doctor did slowly, and as though
unwillingly, dismount again from his steed, and slowly retrace his
steps into the house.

'It is no use,' he said to himself, 'for that messenger has already
gone to Barchester.'

'I have sent for Dr Fillgrave,' were the first words which the
contractor said to him when he again found himself by the bedside.

'Did you call me back to tell me that?' said Thorne, who now felt
really angry at the impertinent petulance of the man before him: 'you
should consider, Scatcherd, that my time may be of value to others, if
not to you.'

'Now don't be angry, old fellow,' said Scatcherd, turning to him, and
looking at him with a countenance quite different from any that he had
shown that day; a countenance in which there was a show of
manhood,--some show also of affection.  'You ain't angry now because
I've sent for Fillgrave?'

'Not in the least,' said the doctor very complacently.  'Not in the
least.  Fillgrave will do as much good as I can do.'

'And that's none at all, I suppose; eh, Thorne?'

'That depends on yourself.  He will do you good if you will tell him
the truth, and will then be guided by him.  Your wife, your servant,
any one can be as good a doctor to you as either he or I; as good, that
is, in the main point.  But you have sent for Fillgrave now; and of
course you must see him. I have much to do, and you must let me go.'

Scatcherd, however, would not let him go, but held his hand fast. 
'Thorne,' said he, 'if you like it, I'll make them put Fillgrave under
the pump directly he comes here.  I will indeed, and pay all the damage
myself.'

This was another proposition to which the doctor could not consent; but
he was utterly unable to refrain from laughing. There was an earnest
look of entreaty about Sir Roger's face as he made the suggestion; and,
joined to this, there was a gleam of comic satisfaction in his eye
which seemed to promise, that if he received the least encouragement he
would put his threat into execution.  Now our doctor was not inclined
to taking any steps towards subjecting his learned brother to pump
discipline; but he could not but admit to himself that the idea was not
a bad one.

'I'll have it done, I will, by heavens! if you'll only say the word,'
protested Sir Roger.

But the doctor did not say the word, and so the idea was passed off.

'You shouldn't be so testy with a man when he is ill,' said Scatcherd,
still holding the doctor's hand, of which he had again got possession;
'specially not an old friend; and specially again when you're been
a-blowing him up.'

It was not worth the doctor's while to aver that the testiness had all
been on the other side, and that he had never lost his good-humour; so
he merely smiled, and asked Sir Roger if he could do anything further
for him.

'Indeed you can, doctor; and that's why I sent for you,--why I sent for
you yesterday.  Get out of the room, Winterbones,' he then said
gruffly, as though he were dismissing from his chamber a dirty dog. 
Winterbones, not a whit offended, again hid his cup under his coat-tail
and vanished.

'Sit down, Thorne, sit down,' said the contractor, speaking in quite a
different manner from any that he had yet assumed. 'I know you're in a
hurry, but you must give me half an hour.  I may be dead before you can
give me another; who knows?'

The doctor of course declared that he hoped to have many a half-hour's
chat with him for many a year to come.

'Well, that's as may be.  You must stop now, at any rate.  You can make
the cob pay for it, you know.'

The doctor took a chair and sat down.  Thus entreated to stop, he had
hardly any alternative but to do so.

'It wasn't because I'm ill that I sent for you, or rather let her
ladyship send for you.  Lord bless you, Thorne; do you think I don't
know what it is that makes me like this?  When I see that poor wretch
Winterbones, killing himself with gin, do you think I don't know what's
coming to myself as well as him?

'Why do you take it then?  Why do you do it?  Your life is not like
his.  Oh, Scatcherd!  Scatcherd!' and the doctor prepared to pour out
the flood of his eloquence in beseeching this singular man to abstain
from his well-known poison.

'Is that all you know of human nature, doctor?  Abstain.  Can you
abstain from breathing, and live like a fish does under water?'

'But Nature has not ordered you to drink, Scatcherd.'

'Habit is second nature, man; and a stronger nature than the first. And
why should I not drink?  What else has the world given me for all that
I have done for it?  What other resource have I?  What other
gratification?'

'Oh, my God!  Have you not unbounded wealth?  Can you not do anything
you wish? be anything you choose?'

'No,' and the sick man shrieked with an energy that made him audible
all through the house.  'I can do nothing that I would choose to do; be
nothing that I would wish to be!  What can I do?  What can I be?  What
gratification can I have except the brandy bottle?  If I go among
gentlemen, can I talk to them?  If they have anything to say about a
railway, they will ask me a question: if they speak to me beyond that, 
I must be dumb.  If I go among my workmen, can they talk to me?  No; I
am their master, and a stern master.  They bob their heads and shake in
their shoes when they see me.  Where are my friends?  Here!' said he,
and he dragged a bottle from under his very pillow.  'Where are my
amusements?  Here!' and he brandished the bottle almost in the doctor's
face.  'Where is my one resource, my one gratification, my only comfort
after all my toils.  Here, doctor; here, here, here!' and, so saying,
he replaced his treasure beneath his pillow.

There was something so horrifying in this, that Dr Thorne shrank back
amazed, and was for a moment unable to speak.

'But, Scatcherd,' he said at last; 'surely you would not die for such a
passion as that?' 'Die for it?  Aye, would I.  Live for it while I can
live; and die for it when I can live no longer.  Die for it!  What is
that for a man to do?  What is a man the worse for dying? What can I be
the worse for dying?  A man can die but once, you said just now.  I'd
die ten times for this.'

'You are speaking now either in madness, or else in folly, to startle
me.'

'Folly enough, perhaps, and madness enough, also.  Such a life as mine
makes a man a fool, and makes him mad too.  What have  about me that I
should be afraid to die?  I'm worth three hundred thousand pounds; and
I'd give it all to be able to go to work to-morrow with a hod and
mortar, and have a fellow clap his hand upon my shoulder, and say:
"Well, Roger, shall us have that 'ere other half-pint this morning?" 
I'll tell you what, Thorne, when a man has made three hundred thousand
pounds, there's nothing left for him but to die.  It's all he's good
for then.  When money's been made, the next thing is to spend it.  Now
the man who makes it has not the heart to do that.'

The doctor, of course, in hearing all this, said something of a
tendency to comfort and console the mind of his patient.  Not that
anything he could say would comfort or console the man; but that it was
impossible to sit there and hear such fearful truths--for as regarded
Scatcherd they were truths--without making some answer.'

'This is as good as a play, isn't, doctor?' said the baronet. 'You
didn't know how I could come out like one of those actor fellows. Well,
now, come; at last I'll tell you why I have sent for you.  Before that
last burst of mine I made my will.'

'You had made a will before that.'

'Yes, I had.  That will is destroyed.  I burnt it with my own hand, so
that there should be no mistake about it.  In that will I had named two
executors, you and Jackson.  I was then partner with Jackson in the
York and Yeovil Grand Central.  I thought a deal of Jackson then.  He's
not worth a shilling now.'

'Well, I'm exactly in the same category.'

'No, you're not.  Jackson is nothing without money; but money'll never
make you.'

'No, nor I shan't make money,' said the doctor.

'No, you never will.  Nevertheless, there's my other will, there, under
that desk there; and I've put you in as sole executor.'

'You must alter that, Scatcherd; you must indeed; with three hundred
thousand pounds to be disposed of, the trust is far too much for any
one man: besides you must name a younger man; you and I are of the same
age, and I may die first.'

'Now, doctor, no humbug; let's have no humbug from you.  Remember this;
if you're not true, you're nothing.'

'Well, but, Scatcherd--'

'Well, but doctor, there's the will, it's already made.  I don't want
to consult you about that.  You are named as executor, and if you have
the heart to refuse to act when I'm dead, why, of course, you can do
so.'

The doctor was not lawyer, and hardly knew whether he had any means of
extricating himself from this position in which his friend was
determined to place him.

'You'll have to see that will carried out, Thorne.  Now I'll tell you
what I have done.'

'You're not going to tell me how you have disposed of your property?'

'Not exactly; at least not all of it.  One hundred thousand I've in
legacies, including, you know, what Lady Scatcherd will have.'

'Have you not left the house to Lady Scatcherd?'

'No; what the devil would she do with a house like this?  She doesn't
know how to live in it now she has got it.  I have provided for her; it
matters not how.  The house and the estate, and the remainder of my
money I have left to Louis Philippe.'

'What!  two hundred thousand pounds?' said the doctor.

'And why shouldn't I leave two hundred thousand pounds to my son, even
to my eldest son if I have more than one?  Does not Mr Gresham leave
all his property to his heir?  Why should not I make an eldest son as
well as Lord de Courcy or the Duke of Omnium?  I suppose a railway
contractor ought not to be allowed an eldest son by Act of Parliament! 
Won't my son have a title to keep up?  And that's more than the
Greshams have among them.'

The doctor explained away what he said as well as he could.  He could
not explain that what he had really meant was this, that Sir Roger
Scatcherd's son was not a man fit to be trusted with the entire control
of an enormous fortune.

Sir Roger Scatcherd had but one child; that child which had been born
in the days of his early troubles, and had been dismissed from his
mother's breast in order that the mother's milk might nourish the young
heir of Greshamsbury.  The boy had grown up, but had become strong
neither in mind nor body. His father had determined to make a gentleman
of him, and had sent to Eton and Cambridge.  But even this receipt, 
generally as it is recognized, will not make a gentleman.  It is hard,
indeed, to define what receipt will do so, though people do have in
their own minds some certain undefined, but yet tolerably correct ideas
on the subject.  Be that as it may, two years at Eton, and three terms
at Cambridge, did not make a gentleman of Louis Philippe Scatcherd.

Yes; he was christened Louis Philippe, after the King of the French. If
one wishes to look out in the world for royal nomenclature, to find
children who have been christened after kings and queens, or the uncles
and aunts of kings and queens, the search should be made in the
families of democrats.  None have so servile a deference for the very 
nail-parings of royalty; none feel so wondering an awe at the 
exaltation of a crowned head; none are so anxious to secure themselves
some shred or fragment that has been consecrated by the royal touch. It
is the distance which they feel to exist between themselves, and the
throne which makes them covet the crumbs of majesty, the odds and ends
and chance splinters of royalty.

There was nothing royal about Louis Philippe Scatcherd but his name. He
had now come to man's estate, and his father, finding the Cambridge
receipt to be inefficacious, had sent him abroad to travel with a
tutor.  The doctor had from time to time heard tidings of this youth;
he knew that he had already shown symptoms of his father's vices, but
no symptoms of his father's talents; he knew that he had begun life by 
being dissipated, without being generous; and that at the age of
twenty-one he had already suffered from delirium tremens.

It was on this account that he had expressed disapprobation, rather
than surprise, when he heard that his father intended to bequeath the
bulk of his large fortune to the uncontrolled will of this unfortunate
boy.

'I have toiled for my money hard, and I have a right to do as I like
with it.  What other satisfaction can it give me?'

The doctor assured him that he did not at all mean to dispute this.

'Louis Philippe will do well enough, you'll find,' continued the
baronet, understanding what was passing within his companion's breast. 
'Let a young fellow sow his wild oats while he is young, and he'll be
steady enough when he grows old.'

'But what if he never lives to get through the sowing?' thought the
doctor to himself.  'What if the wild-oats operation is carried on in
so violent a manner as to leave no strength in the soil for the product
of a more valuable crop?'  It was of no use saying this, however, so he
allowed Scatcherd to continue.

'If I'd had a free fling when I was a youngster, I shouldn't have been
so fond of the brandy bottle now.  But any way, my son shall be my
heir.  I've had the gumption to make the money, but I haven't the
gumption to spend it.  My son, however, shall be able to ruffle it with
the best of them.  I'll go bail he shall hold his head higher than ever
young Gresham will be able to hold his.  They are much of the same age,
as well I have cause to remember;--and so has her ladyship here.'

Now the fact was, that Sir Roger Scatcherd felt in his heart no special
love for young Gresham; but with her ladyship it might almost be a
question whether she did not love the youth whom she had nursed almost
as well as that other one who was her own proper offspring.

'And will you not put any check on thoughtless expenditure?  If you live
ten or twenty years, as we hope you may, it will become unnecessary;
but in making a will, a man should always remember he may go off
suddenly.'

'Especially if he goes to bed with a brandy bottle under his head; eh,
doctor?  But, mind, that's a medical secret, you know; not a word of
that out of the bedroom.'

Dr Thorne could but sigh.  What could he say on such a subject to such
a man as this?

'Yes, I have put a check on his expenditure.  I will not let his daily
bread depend on any man; I have therefore let him five hundred a year
at his own disposal, from the day of my death.  Let him make what ducks
and drakes of that he can.'

'Five hundred a year is certainly not much,'said the doctor.

'No; nor do I want to keep him to that.  Let him have whatever he wants
if he sets about spending it properly.  But the bulk of the
property--this estate of Boxall Hill, and the Greshamsbury mortgage, and
those other mortgages--I have tied up in this way: they shall be all his
at twenty-five; and up to that age it shall be in your power to give
him what he wants. If he shall die without children before he shall be 
twenty-five years of age, they are all to go to Mary's eldest child.'

Now Mary was Sir Roger's sister, the mother, therefore, of Miss Thorne,
and, consequently, the wife of the respectable ironmonger who went to
America, and the mother of a family there.

'Mary's eldest child!' said the doctor, feeling that the perspiration
had nearly broken out on his forehead, and that he could hardly control
his feelings.  'Mary's eldest child! Scatcherd, you should be more
particular in your description, or you will leave your best legacy to
the lawyers.'

'I don't know, and never heard the name of one of them.'

'But do you mean a boy or a girl?'

'They may be all girls for what I know, or all boys; besides, I don't
care which it is.  A girl would probably do best with it.  Only you'd
have to see that she married some decent fellow; you'd be her
guardian.'

'Pooh, nonsense,' said the doctor.  'Louis will be five-and-twenty in
a year or two.'

'In about four years.'

'And for all that's come and gone yet, Scatcherd, you are not going to
leave us yourself quite so soon as all that.'

'Not if I can help it; but that's as may be.'

'The chances are ten to one that such a clause in your will will never
come to bear.'

'Quite so, quite so.  If I die, Louis Philippe won't, but I thought it
right to put in something to prevent his squandering it all before he
comes to his senses.'

'Oh! quite right, quite right.  I think I would have named a later age
than twenty-five.'

'So would not I.  Louis Philippe will be all right by that time. That's
my lookout.  And now, doctor, you know my will; and if I die to-morrow,
you will know what I want you to do for me.'

'You have merely said the eldest child, Scatcherd?'

'That's all; give it here; and I'll read it to you.'

'No; no; never mind.  The eldest child!  You should be more particular,
Scatcherd; you should, indeed.  Consider what an enormous interest may
have to depend on those words.'

'Why, what the devil could I say?  I don't know their names; never even
heard them.  But the eldest is the eldest, all the world over.  Perhaps
I ought to say the youngest, seeing that I am only a railway
contractor.'

Scatcherd began to think that the doctor might now as well go away and
leave him to the society of Winterbones and the brandy; but, much as
our friend had before expressed himself in a hurry, he now seemed
inclined to move very leisurely.  He sat there by the bedside, resting
his hands on his knees and gazing unconsciously at the counterpane.  At
last he gave a deep sigh, and then he said, 'Scatcherd, you must be
more particular in this.  If I am to have anything to do with it, you
must, indeed, be more explicit.'

'Why, how the deuce can I be more explicit?  Isn't her eldest living
child plain enough, whether he be Jack, or she be Gill?'

'What did your lawyer say to this, Scatcherd?'

'Lawyer!  You don't suppose I let my lawyer know what I was putting. 
No; I got the form and the paper, and all that from him, and I did it
in another.  It's all right enough.  Though Winterbones wrote it, he
did it in such a way he did not know what he was writing.'

The doctor sat a while longer, still looking at the counter-pane, and
then got up to depart.  'I'll see you again soon,' said he; 'to-morrow,
probably.'

'To-morrow!' said Sir Roger, not at all understanding why Dr Thorne
should talk of returning so soon.  'To-morrow!  why I ain't so bad as
that, man, am I?  If you come so often as that you will ruin me.'

'Oh, not as a medical man; not as that; but about this will, 
Scatcherd.  I must think if over; I must, indeed.'

'You need not give yourself the least trouble in the world about my
will till I'm dead; not the least.  And who knows--may be, I may be
settling your affairs yet; eh, doctor?  looking after your niece when
you're dead and gone, and getting a husband for her, eh?  Ha! ha! ha!'

And then, without further speech, the doctor went his way.



CHAPTER XI

THE DOCTOR DRINKS HIS TEA

The doctor got on his cob and went his way, returning duly to 
Greshamsbury.  But, in truth, as he went he hardly knew whither he was
going, or what he was doing.  Sir Roger had hinted that the cob would
be compelled to make up for lost time by extra exertion on the road;
but the cob had never been permitted to have his own way as to pace
more satisfactorily than on the present occasion.  The doctor, indeed,
hardly knew that he was on horseback, so completely was he enveloped in
the cloud of his own thoughts.

In the first place, that alternative which it had become him to put
before the baronet as one unlikely to occur--that of the speedy death of
both father and son--was one which he felt in his heart of hearts might
very probably come to pass.

'The chances are ten to one that such a clause will never be brought to
bear.'  This he had said partly to himself, so as to ease the thoughts
which came crowding on his brain; partly, also, in pity for the patient
and the father.  But now that he thought the matter over, he felt that
there were no such odds. Were not the odds the other way?  Was it not 
almost probable that both these men might be gathered to their long
account within the next four years?  One, the elder, was a strong man,
indeed; one who might yet live for years to come if he could but give
himself fair play.  But then, he himself protested, and protested with
a truth too surely grounded, that fair play to himself was beyond his
own power to give.  The other, the younger, had everything against
him.  Not only was he a poor, puny creature, without physical strength,
one of whose life a friend could never feel sure under any
circumstances, but he also was already addicted to his father's vices;
he also was already killing himself with alcohol.

And then, if these two men did die within the prescribed period, if
this clause of Sir Roger's will were brought to bear, it should become
his, Dr Thorne's, duty to see that clause carried out, how would he be
bound to act?  That woman's eldest child was his own niece, his adopted
bairn, his darling, the pride of his heart, the cynosure of his eye, 
his child also, his own Mary.  Of all his duties on this earth, next to
that one great duty to his God and conscience, was his duty to her. 
What, under these circumstances, did his duty to her require of him?

But then, that one great duty, that duty which she would be the first
to expect from him; what did that demand of him?  Had Scatcherd made
his will without saying what its clauses were, it seemed to Thorne that
Mary must have been the heiress, should that clause become necessarily
operative.  Whether she were so or not would at any rate be for lawyers
to decide.  But now the case was very different.  This rich man had
confided in him, and would it not be a breach of confidence, an act of
absolute dishonesty--an act of dishonesty both to Scatcherd and to that
far-distant American family, to that father, who, in former days, had
behaved so nobly, and to that eldest child of his, would it not be
gross dishonesty to them all if he allowed this man to leave a will by
which his property might go to a person never intended to be his heir?

Long before he had arrived at Greshamsbury his mind on this point had
been made up.  Indeed, it had been made up while sitting there by
Scatcherd's bedside.  It had not been difficult to make up his mind to
so much; but then, his way out of this dishonesty was not so easy for
him to find.  How should he set this matter right to as to inflict no
injury on his niece, and no sorrow to himself--if that indeed could be 
avoided?

And then other thoughts crowded on his brain.  He had always 
professed--professed at any rate to himself and to her--that of all the
vile objects of a man's ambition, wealth, wealth merely for its own
sake, was the vilest.  They, in their joint school of inherent
philosophy, had progressed to ideas which they might find it not easy
to carry out, should they be called on by events to do so.  And if this
would have been difficult to either when acting on behalf of self
alone, how much more difficult when one might have to act for the
other! This difficulty had now come to the uncle.  Should he, in this
emergency, take upon himself to fling away the golden chance which
might accrue to his niece if Scatcherd should be encouraged to make her
partly his heir?

'He'd want her to go and live there--to live with him and his wife.  
All the money in the Bank of England would not pay her for such misery,'
said the doctor to himself, as he slowly rode into is own yard.

On one point, and one only, had he definitely made up his mind. On the
following day he would go over again to Boxall Hill, and would tell
Scatcherd the whole truth.  Come what might, the truth must be best. 
And so, with some gleam of comfort, he went into the house, and found
his niece in the drawing-room with Patience Oriel.

'Mary and I have been quarrelling,' said Patience.  'She says the
doctor is the greatest man in a village; and I say the parson is of
course.'

'I only say that the doctor is the most looked after,' said Mary. 
'There's another horrid message for you to go to Silverbridge, uncle. 
Why can't that Dr Century manage his own people?'

'She says,' continued Miss Oriel, 'that if a parson was away for a
month, no one would miss him; but that a doctor is so precious that his
very minutes are counted.'

'I am sure uncle's are.  They begrudge him his meals.  Mr Oriel never
gets called away to Silverbridge.'

'No; we in the Church manage our parish arrangements better than you
do.  We don't let strange practitioners in among our flocks because the
sheep may chance to fancy them.  Our sheep have to put up with our
spiritual doses whether they like them or not.  In that respect we are
much the best off.  I advise you, Mary, to marry a clergyman, by all
means.'

'I will when you marry a doctor,' said she.

'I am sure nothing on earth would give me greater pleasure,' said Miss
Oriel, getting up and curtseying very low to Dr Thorne; 'but I am not
quite prepared for the agitation of an offer this morning, so I'll run
away.'

And so she went; and the doctor, getting to his other horse, started
again for Silverbridge, wearily enough.  'She's happy now where she
is,' said he to himself, as he rode along.  'They all treat her there
as an equal at Greshamsbury.  What though she be no cousin to the
Thornes of Ullathorne.  She has found her place there among them all,
and keeps it on equal terms with the best of them.  There is Miss
Oriel; her family is high; she is rich, fashionable, a beauty, courted 
by every one; but yet she does not look down on Mary.  They are equal
friends together.  But how would it be if she were taken to Boxall
Hill, even as a recognized niece of the rich man there?  Would Patience
Oriel and Beatrice Gresham go there after her?  Could she be happy
there as she is in my house here, poor though it be?  It would kill her
to pass a month with Lady Scatcherd and put up with that man's humours,
to see his mode of life, to be dependent on him, to belong to him.' And
then the doctor, hurrying on to Silverbridge, again met Dr Century at
the old lady's bedside, and having made his endeavours to stave off the
inexorable coming of the grim visitor,