 again returned to his own niece
and his own drawing-room.

'You must be dead, uncle,' said Mary, as she poured out his tea for
him, and prepared the comforts of that most comfortable meal-tea,
dinner, and supper, all in one.  'I wish Silverbridge was fifty miles
off.'

'That would only make the journey worse; but I am not dead yet, and,
what is more to the purpose, neither is my patient.'  And as he spoke
he contrived to swallow a jorum of scalding tea, containing in measure
somewhat near a pint.  Mary, not a whit amazed at this feat, merely
refilled the jorum without any observation; and the doctor went on 
stirring the mixture with his spoon, evidently oblivious that any
ceremony had been performed by either of them since the first supply
had been administered to him. 

When the clatter of knives and forks was over, the doctor turned
himself to the hearthrug, and putting one leg over the other, he began
to nurse it as he looked with complacency at his third cup of tea,
which stood untasted beside him.  The fragments of the solid banquet
had been removed, but no sacrilegious hand had been laid on the teapot
and the cream-jug.

'Mary,' said he, 'suppose you were to find out to-morrow morning that,
by some accident, you had become a great heiress, would you be able to
suppress your exultation?'

'The first thing I'd do, would be to pronounce a positive edict that
you should never go to Silverbridge again; at least without a day's
notice.'

'Well, and what next?  what would you do next?'

'The next thing--the next thing would be to send to Paris for a French
bonnet exactly like the one Patience Oriel had on.  Did you see it?'

'Well I can't say I did; bonnets are invisible now; besides I never
remark anybody's clothes, except yours.'

'Oh! do look at Miss Oriel's bonnet the next time you see her. I cannot
understand why it should be so, but I am sure of this--no English
fingers put together such a bonnet as that; and I am nearly sure that
no French fingers could do it in England.'

'But you don't care so much about bonnets, Mary!'  This the doctor said
as an assertion; but there was, nevertheless, somewhat of a question
involved in it.

'Don't I though?' said she.  'I do care very much about bonnets;
especially since I saw Patience this morning.  I asked how much it
cost--guess.'

'Oh!  I don't know--a pound?'

'A pound, uncle!'

'What! a great deal more?  Ten pounds?'

'Oh, uncle.'

'What! more than ten pounds?  Then I don't think even Patience Oriel
ought to give it.'

'No, of course she would not; but, uncle, it really cost a hundred
francs!'

'Oh! a hundred francs; that's four pounds, isn't it?  Well, and how
much did your last new bonnet cost?'

'Mine! oh, nothing--five and ninepence, perhaps; I trimmed it myself. 
If I were left a great fortune, I'd send to Paris to-morrow; no, I'd 
go myself to Paris to buy a bonnet, and I'd take you with me to choose
it.'

The doctor sat silent for a while meditating about this, during which
he unconsciously absorbed the tea beside him; and Mary again
replenished his cup.

'Come, Mary,' he said at last, 'I'm in a generous mood; and as I am
rather more rich than usual, we'll send to Paris for a French
bonnet.  The going for it must wait a while longer I am afraid.'

'You're joking.'

'No, indeed.  If you know the way to send--that I must confess would
puzzle me; but if you'll manage the sending, I'll manage the paying;
and you shall have a French bonnet.'

'Uncle!' said she, looking up at him.

'Oh, I'm not joking; I owe you a present, and I'll give you that.'

'And if you do, I'll tell you what I'll do with it.  I'll cut it into
fragments, and burn them before your face.  Why, uncle, what do you
take me for?  You're not a bit nice to-night to make such an offer as
that to me; not a bit, not a bit.'  And then she came over from her
seat at the tea-tray and sat down on a foot-stool close at his knee. 
'Because I'd have a French bonnet if I had a large fortune, is that a 
reason why I should like one now?  if you were to pay four pounds for a
bonnet for me, it would scorch my head every time I put it on.'

'I don't see that: four pounds would not ruin me.  However, I don't
think you'd look a bit better if you had it; and, certainly, I should
not like to scorch these locks,' and putting his hand upon her
shoulders, he played with her hair.

'Patience has a pony-phaeton, and I'd have one if I were rich; and I'd
have all my books bound as she does; and, perhaps, I'd give fifty
guineas for a dressing-case.'

'Fifty guineas!'

'Patience did not tell me; but so Beatrice says.  Patience showed it to
me once, and it is a darling.  I think I'd have the dressing-case
before the bonnet.  But, uncle--'

'Well?'

'You don't suppose I want such things?'

'Not improperly.  I am sure you do not.'

'Not properly, or improperly; not much, or little.  I covet many
things; but nothing of that sort.  You know, or should know, that I do
not.  Why do you talk of buying a French bonnet for me?'

Dr Thorne did not answer this question, but went on nursing his leg.

'After all,' said he, 'money is a fine thing.'

'Very fine, when it is well come by,' she answered; 'that is, without
detriment to the heart and soul.'

'I should be a happier man if you were provided for as Miss Oriel. 
Suppose, now, I could give you up to a rich man who would be able to
insure you against all wants?'

'Insure me against all wants!  Oh, that would be a man.  That would be
selling me, wouldn't it, uncle?  Yes, selling me; and the price you
would receive would be freedom from future apprehensions as regards
me.  It would be a cowardly sale for you to make; and then, as to me--me
the victim.  No, uncle; you must bear the misery of having to provide
for me--bonnets and all.  We are in the same boat, and you shan't turn
me overboard.'

'But if I were to die, what would you do then?'

'And if I were to die, what would you do?  People must be bound
together.  They must depend on each other.  Of course, misfortunes may
come; but it is cowardly to be afraid of them beforehand.  You and I
are bound together, uncle; and though you say these things to tease me,
I know you do not wish to get rid of me.'

'Well, well; we shall win through, doubtless; if not in one way, then
in another.'

'Win through!  Of course we shall; who doubts our winning? but, uncle--'

'But, Mary.'

'Well?'

'You haven't got another cup of tea, have you?'

'Oh, uncle! you have had five.'

'No, my dear! not five; only four--only four.  I assure you; I have 
been very particular to count.  I had one while I was--'

'Five uncle; indeed and indeed.'

'Well, then, as I hate the prejudice which attaches luck to an odd
number, I'll have the sixth to show that I am not superstitious.'

While Mary was preparing the sixth jorum, there came a knock at the
door.  Those late summonses were hateful to Mary's ear, for they were
usually forerunners of a midnight ride through the dark lanes to some
farmer's house.  The doctor had been in the saddle all day, and, as
Janet brought the note into the room, Mary stood up as though to defend
her uncle from any further invasion on his rest.

'A note from the house, miss,' said Janet: now 'the house', in
Greshamsbury parlance, always meant the squire's mansion.

'No one ill at the house, I hope,' said the doctor, taking the note
from Mary's hand.  'Oh--ah--yes; it's from the squire--there's nobody
ill: wait a minute, Janet, and I'll write a line.  Mary, lend me your
desk.'

The squire, anxious as usual for money, had written to ask what success
the doctor had had in negotiating the new loan with Sir Roger.  That
fact, however, was, that in his visit to Boxall Hill, the doctor had
been altogether unable to bring on the carpet the matter of this loan. 
Subjects had crowded themselves in too quickly during that
interview--those two interviews at Sir Roger's bedside; and he had been 
obliged to leave without even alluding to the question.

'I must at any rate go back now,' he said to himself.  So he wrote to
the squire, saying that he was to be at Boxall Hill again on the
following day, and that he would call at the house on his return.

'That's all settled, at any rate,' said he.

'What's settled?' said Mary.

'Why, I must go to Boxall Hill again to-morrow.  I must go early, too,
so we'd better both be off to bed.  Tell Janet I must breakfast at
half-past seven.'

'You couldn't take me, could you?  I should so like to see that Sir
Roger.'

'To see Sir Roger!  Why, he's ill in bed.'

'That's an objection, certainly; but some day, when he's well, could
you not take me over?  I have the greatest desire to see a man like
that; a man who began with nothing and now has more than enough to buy
the whole parish of Greshamsbury.'

'I don't think you'd like him at all.'

'Why not?  I am sure I should; I am sure I should like him, and Lady
Scatcherd too.  I've heard you say that she is an excellent woman.'

'Yes, in her way; and he, too, is good in his way; but they are neither
of them in your way: they are extremely vulgar--'

'Oh!  I don't mind that; that would make them more amusing; one doesn't
go to those sort of people for polished manners.'

'I don't think you'd find the Scatcherds pleasant acquaintances at
all,' said the doctor, taking his bed-candle, and kissing his niece's
forehead as he left the room.



CHAPTER XII

WHEN GREEK MEETS GREEK, THEN COMES THE TUG OF WAR

The doctor, that is our doctor, had thought nothing more of the message
which had been sent to that other doctor, Dr Fillgrave; nor in truth
did the baronet.  Lady Scatcherd had thought of it, but her husband
during the rest of the day was not in a humour which allowed her to
remind him that he would soon have a new physician on his hands; so she
left the difficulty to arrange itself, waiting in some little 
trepidation till Dr Fillgrave should show himself.

It was well that Sir Roger was not dying for want of his assistance,
for when the message reached Barchester, Dr Fillgrave was some five or
six miles out of town, at Plumstead; and as he did not get back till
late in the evening, he felt himself necessitated to put off his visit
to Boxall Hill till next morning.  Had he chanced to have been made
acquainted with that little conversation about the pump, he would
probably have postponed it even yet a while longer.

He was, however, by no means sorry to be summoned to the bedside of Sir
Roger Scatcherd.  It was well known at Barchester, and very well known
to Dr Fillgrave, that Sir Roger and Dr Thorne were old friends.  It was
very well known to him also, that Sir Roger, in all his bodily
ailments, had hitherto been contented to entrust his safety to the
skill of his old friend.  Sir Roger was in his way a great man, and 
much talked of in Barchester, and rumour had already reached the ears
of the Barchester Galen, that the great railway contractor was ill. 
When, therefore, he received a peremptory summons to go over to Boxall
Hill, he could not but think that some pure light had broken in upon
Sir Roger's darkness, and taught him at last where to look for true 
medical accomplishment.

And then, also, Sir Roger was the richest man in the county, and to
county practitioners a new patient with large means is a godsend; how
much greater a godsend when not only acquired, but taken also from
some rival practitioner, need hardly be explained.

Dr Fillgrave, therefore, was somewhat elated when, after an early
breakfast, he stepped into the post-chaise which was to carry him to
Boxall Hill.  Dr Fillgrave's professional advancement had been
sufficient to justify the establishment of a brougham, in which he paid
his ordinary visits round Barchester; but this was a special occasion,
requiring special speed, and about to produce no doubt a special 
guerdon, and therefore a pair of post-horses were put into request.

It was hardly yet nine when the post-boy somewhat loudly rang the bell
at Sir Roger's door; and then Dr Fillgrave, for the first time, found
himself in the new grand hall of Boxall Hill house.

'I'll tell my lady,' said the servant, showing him into the grand
dining-room; and there for some fifteen minutes or twenty minutes Dr
Fillgrave walked up and down the length of the Turkey carpet all alone.

Dr Fillgrave was not a tall man, and was perhaps rather more inclined
to corpulence than became his height.  In his stocking-feet, according
to the usually received style of measurement, he was five feet five;
and he had a little round abdominal protuberance, which an inch and a
half added to the heels of his boots hardly enabled him to carry off as
well as he himself would have wished.  Of this he was apparently 
conscious, and it gave to him an air of not being entirely at his
ease.  There was, however, a personal dignity in his demeanour, a
propriety in his gait, and an air of authority in his gestures which
should prohibit one from stigmatizing those efforts at altitude as a
failure.  No doubt he did achieve much; but, nevertheless, the effort
would occasionally betray itself, and the story of the frog and the ox
would irresistibly force itself into one's mind at those moments when
it most behoved Dr Fillgrave to be magnificent.

But if the bulgy roundness of his person and the shortness of his legs
in any way detracted from his personal importance, these trifling
defects were, he was well aware, more than atoned for by the peculiar
dignity of his countenance.  If his legs were short, his face was not;
if there was any undue preponderance below the waistcoat, all was in
due symmetry above the necktie.  His hair was grey, not grizzled, nor 
white, but properly grey; and stood up straight from his temples on
each side, with an unbending determination of purpose.  His whiskers,
which were of an admirable shape, coming down and turning gracefully at
the angle of his jaw, were grey also, but somewhat darker than his
hair.  His enemies in Barchester declared that their perfect shade was 
produced by a leaden comb.  His eyes were not brilliant, but were very
effective, and well under command.  He was rather short-sighted, and a
pair of eye-glasses was always on his nose, or in his hand.  His nose
was long, and well pronounced, and his chin, also, was sufficiently
prominent; but the great feature of his face was his mouth.  The amount
of secret medical knowledge of which he could give assurance by the
pressure of those lips was truly wonderful.  By his lips, also, he
could be most exquisitely courteous, or most sternly forbidding.  And
not only could he be either the one or the other; but he could at his
will assume any shade of difference between the two, and produce any
mixture of sentiment.

When Dr Fillgrave was first shown into Sir Roger's dining-room, he
walked up and down the room for a while with easy, jaunty step, with
his hands joined together behind his back, calculating the price of the
furniture, and counting the heads which might be adequately entertained
in a room of such noble proportions; but in seven or eight minutes an
air of impatience might have been seen to suffuse his face.  Why could
he not be shown into the sick man's room?  What necessity could there
be for keeping him there, as though he were some apothecary with a box
of leeches in his pocket?  He then rang the bell, perhaps a little
violently.  'Does Sir Roger know that I am here?' he said to the
servant.  'I'll tell my lady,' said the man, again vanishing.

For five minutes more he walked up and down, calculating no longer the
value of the furniture, but rather that of his own importance.  He was
not wont to be kept waiting in this way; and though Sir Roger Scatcherd
was at present a great and rich man, Dr Fillgrave had remembered him a
very small and a very poor man.  He now began to think of Sir Roger as
the stone-mason, and to chafe somewhat more violently at being so kept
by such a man.

When one is impatient, five minutes is as the duration of all time, and
a quarter of an hour is eternity.  At the end of twenty minutes the
step of Dr Fillgrave up and down the room had become very quick, and he
had just made up his mind that he would not stay there all day to the
serious detriment, perhaps fatal injury, of his other expectant
patients.  His hand was again on the bell, and was about to be used with
vigour, when the door opened and Lady Scatcherd entered.

'Oh, laws!'  Such had been her first exclamation on hearing that the
doctor was in the dining-room.  She was standing at the time with her
housekeeper in a small room in which she kept her linen and jam, and in
which, in company with the same housekeeper, she spent the happiest
moments of her life.

'Oh laws! now, Hannah, what shall we do?'

'Send 'un up at once to master, my lady! let John take 'un up.'

'There'll be such a row in the house, Hannah; I know there will.'

'But surely didn't he send for 'un?  Let the master have the row
himself, then; that's what I'd do, my lady,' added Hannah, seeing that
her ladyship still stood trembling in doubt, biting her thumb-nail.

'You couldn't go up to the master yourself, could now, Hannah?' said
Lady Scatcherd in her most persuasive tone.

'Why no,' said Hannah, after a little deliberation; 'no, I'm afeard I
couldn't.'

'Then I must just face it myself.'  And up went the wife to tell her
lord that the physician for whom he had sent had come to attend his
bidding.

In the interview which then took place the baronet had not indeed been
violent, but he had been very determined.  Nothing on earth, he said,
should induce him to see Dr Fillgrave and offend his dear old friend Dr
Thorne.

'But Roger,' said her ladyship, half crying, or rather pretending to
cry in vexation, 'what shall I do with the man? How shall I get him out
of the house?'

'Put him under the pump,' said the baronet; and he laughed his peculiar
low guttural laugh, which told so plainly of the havoc which brandy had
made in his throat.

'That's nonsense, Roger; you know I can't put him under the pump.  Now
you are ill, and you'd better see him just for five minutes.  I'll make
it right with Dr Thorne.'

'I'll be d--- if I do, my lady.'  All the people about Boxall Hill called
poor Lady Scatcherd 'my lady' as if there was some excellent joke in
it; and, so, indeed, there was.

'You know you needn't mind nothing he says, nor yet take nothing he
sends: and I'll tell him not to come no more.  Now do 'ee see him,
Roger.'

But there was not coaxing Roger over now, indeed ever: he was a wilful,
headstrong, masterful man; a tyrant always though never a cruel one;
and accustomed to rule his wife and household as despotically as he did
his gangs of workmen.  Such men it is not easy to coax over.

'You go down and tell him I don't want him, and won't see him, and
that's an end of it.  If he chose to earn his money, why didn't he come
yesterday when he was sent for?  I'm well now, and don't want him; and
what's more, I won't have him.  Winterbones, lock the door.'

So Winterbones, who during this interview had been at work at his
little table, got up to lock the door, and Lady Scatcherd had no
alternative but to pass through it before the last edict was obeyed.

Lady Scatcherd, with slow step, went downstairs and again sought
counsel with Hannah, and the two, putting their heads together, agreed
that the only cure for the present evil was to found in a good fee.  So
Lady Scatcherd, with a five-pound note in her hand, and trembling in
every limb, went forth to encounter the august presence of Dr
Fillgrave.

As the door opened, Dr Fillgrave dropped the bell-rope which was in his
hand, and bowed low to the lady.  Those who knew the doctor well, would
have known from his bow that he was not well pleased; it was as much as
though he said, 'Lady Scatcherd, I am your most obedient servant; at
any rate it appears that it is your pleasure to treat me as such.'

Lady Scatcherd did not understand all this; but she perceived at once
that he was angry.

'I hope Sir Roger does not find himself worse,' said the doctor.  'The
morning is getting on; shall I step up and see him?'

'Hem! ha! oh!  Why, you see, Dr Fillgrave, Sir Roger finds hisself
vastly better this morning, vastly so.'

'I'm very glad to hear it; but as the morning is getting on, shall I
step up to see Sir Roger?'

'Why, Dr Fillgrave, sir, you see, he finds hisself so much hisself this
morning, that he a'most thinks it would be a shame to trouble you.'

'A shame to trouble me!'  This was the sort of shame which Dr Fillgrave
did not at all comprehend.  'A shame to trouble me! Why Lady
Scatcherd--'

Lady Scatcherd saw that she had nothing for it but to make the whole
matter intelligible.  Moreover, seeing that she appreciated more
thoroughly the smallness of Dr Fillgrave's person more thoroughly than
she did the peculiar greatness of his demeanour, she began to be a
shade less afraid of him than she had thought she should have been.

'Yes, Dr Fillgrave; you see, when a man like he gets well, he can't
abide the idea of doctors: now, yesterday, he was all for sending for
you; but to-day he comes to hisself, and don't seem to want no doctor
at all.'

Then did Dr Fillgrave seem to grow out of his boots, so suddenly did he
take upon himself sundry modes of expansive attitude;--to grow out of
his boots and to swell upwards, till his angry eyes almost looked down
on Lady Scatcherd, and each erect hair bristled up towards the heavens.

'This is very singular, very singular, Lady Scatcherd; very singular
indeed; very singular; quite unusual. I have come here from Barchester,
at some considerable inconvenience, at some very considerable
inconvenience, I may say, to my regular patients; and--and--and--I don't
know that anything so very singular ever occurred to me before.' And
then Dr Fillgrave, with a compression of his lips which almost made the
poor woman sink into the ground, moved towards the door.

Then Lady Scatcherd bethought of her great panacea.  'It isn't about
the money, you know, doctor,' said she; 'of course Sir Roger don't
expect you to come here with post-horses for nothing.'  In this, by
the by, Lady Scatcherd did not stick quite close to veracity, for Sir
Roger, had he known it, would by no means have assented to any payment;
and the note which her ladyship held in her hand was taken from her own
private purse.  'It ain't about the money, doctor;' and then she
tendered the bank-note, which she thought would immediately make all
things smooth.

Now Dr Fillgrave dearly loved a five-pound fee.  What physician is so
unnatural as not to love it?  He dearly loved a five-pound fee; but he
loved his dignity better.  He was angry also; and like all angry men,
he loved his grievance.  He felt that he had been badly treated; but if
he took the money he would throw away his right to indulge in any such 
feeling.  At that moment his outraged dignity and cherished anger were
worth more than a five-pound note.  He looked at it with wishful but
still averted eyes, and then sternly refused the tender.

'No, madam,' said he; 'no, no;' and with his right hand raised with his
eye-glasses in it, he motioned away the tempting paper.  'No; I should
have been happy to have given Sir Roger the benefit of any medical
skill I may have, seeing that I was specially called in--'

'But, doctor; if the man's well, you know--'

'Oh, of course; if he's well, and does not choose to see me, there's an
end of it.  Should he have any relapse, as my time is valuable, he will
perhaps oblige me by sending elsewhere. Madam, good morning.  I will,
if you will allow me, ring for my carriage--that is, post-chaise.'

'But, doctor, you'll take the money; you must take the money; indeed
you'll take the money,' said Lady Scatcherd, who had now become really
unhappy at the idea of her husband's unpardonable whim had brought this
man with post-horses all the way from Barchester, and that he was to be
paid nothing for his time or costs.

'No, madam, no.  I could not think of it.  Sir Roger, I have no doubt,
will know better another time.  It is not a question of money; not at
all.'

'But it is a question of money, doctor; and you really shall, you
must.'  And poor Lady Scatcherd, in her anxiety to acquit herself at
any rate of any pecuniary debt to the doctor, came to personal close
quarters with him, with a view of forcing the note into his hands.

'Quite impossible, quite impossible,' said the doctor, still cherishing
his grievance, and valiantly rejecting the root of all evil.  'I shall
not do anything of the kind, Lady Scatcherd.'

'Now doctor, do 'ee; to oblige me.'

'Quite out of the question.'  And so, with his hands and hat behind his
back, in token of his utter refusal to accept any pecuniary
accommodation of his injury, he made his way backwards to the door, her
ladyship perseveringly pressing him in front.  So eager had been the
attack on him, that he had not waited to give his order about the
post-chaise, but made his way at once towards the hall.

'Now, do 'ee take it, do 'ee,' pressed Lady Scatcherd.

'Utterly out of the question,' said Dr Fillgrave, with great 
deliberation, as he backed his way into the hall.  As he did so, of
course he turned round,--and he found himself almost in the arms of Dr
Thorne.

As Burley might have glared at Bothwell when they rushed together in
the dread encounter on the mountain side; as Achilles may have glared
at Hector when at last they met, each resolved to test in fatal
conflict the prowess of the other, so did Dr Fillgrave glare at his foe
from Greshamsbury, when, on turning round on his exalted heel, he found
his nose on a level with the top button of Dr Thorne's waistcoat.

And here, if it be not too tedious, let us pause a while to 
recapitulate and add up the undoubted grievances of the Barchester
practitioner.  He had made no effort to ingratiate himself into the
sheepfold of that other shepherd-dog; it was not by his seeking that he
was not at Boxall Hill; much as he hated Dr Thorne, full sure as he
felt of that man's utter ignorance, of his incapacity to administer
properly even a black dose, of his murdering propensities and his low,
mean, unprofessional style of practice; nevertheless, he had done 
nothing to undermine him with these Scatcherds.  Dr Thorne might have
sent every mother's son at Boxall Hill to his long account, and Dr
Fillgrave would not have interfered;--would not have interfered unless
specially and duly called upon to do so.

But he had been and duly called on.  Before such a step was taken some
words must undoubtedly have passed on the subject between Thorne and
Scatcherds.  Thorne must have known what was to be done.  Having been
so called, Dr Fillgrave had come--had come all the way in a
post-chaise--had been refused admittance to the sick man's room, on the
plea that the sick man was no longer sick; and just as he was about to
retire fee-less--for the want of the fee was not the less a grievance 
from the fact of its having been tendered and refused--feeless,
dishonoured, and in dudgeon, he encountered this other doctor--this
very rival whom he had bee sent to supplant; he encountered him in the
very act of going to the sick man's room.

What mad fanatic Burley, what god-succoured insolent Achilles, ever had
such cause to swell with wrath as at that moment had Dr Fillgrave?  Had
I the pen of Moliere, I could fitly tell of such medical anger, but
with no other pen can it be fitly told. He did swell, and when the huge
bulk of his wrath was added to his natural proportions, he loomed 
gigantic before the eyes of the surrounding followers of Sir Roger.

Dr Thorne stepped back three steps and took his hat from his head,
having, in the passage from the hall-door to the dining-room, hitherto
omitted to do so.  It must be borne in mind that he had to conception
whatever that Sir Roger had declined to see the physician for whom he
had sent; none whatever that the physician was not about to return,
feeless, to Barchester.

Dr Thorne and Dr Fillgrave were doubtless well-known enemies. All the
world of Barchester, and all that portion of the world of London which
is concerned with the lancet and the scalping-knife, were well aware of
this: they were continually writing against each other; continually
speaking against each other; but yet they had never hitherto come to 
that positive personal collision which is held to justify a cut
direct.  They very rarely saw each other; and when they did meet, it
was in some casual way in the streets of Barchester or elsewhere, and
on such occasions their habit had been to bow with very cold propriety.

On the present occasion, Dr Thorne of course felt that Dr Fillgrave had
the whip-hand of him; and, with a sort of manly feeling on such a
point, he conceived it to be most compatible with his own dignity to
show, under such circumstances, more than his usual courtesy--something,
perhaps, amounting almost to cordiality.  He had been supplanted, quoad
doctor, in the house of this rich, eccentric, railway baronet, and he
would show that he bore no malice on that account.

So he smiled blandly as he took off his hat, and in a civil speech he
expressed a hope that Dr Fillgrave had not found his patient to be in
any very unfavourable state.

Here was an aggravation to the already lacerated feelings of the
injured man.  He had been brought thither to be scoffed at and scorned
at, that he might be a laughing-stock to his enemies, and food for
mirth to the vile-minded.  He swelled with noble anger till he would
have burst, had it not been for the opportune padding of his
frock-coat.

'Sir,' said he; 'sir:' and he could hardly get his lips open to give
vent to the tumult of his heart.  Perhaps he was not wrong; for it may
be that his lips were more eloquent than would have been his words.

'What's the matter?' said Dr Thorne, opening his eyes wide, and
addressing Lady Scatcherd over his head and across the hairs of the
irritated man below him.  'What on earth is the matter?  Is anything
wrong with Sir Roger?'

'Oh, laws, doctor!' said her ladyship.  'Oh, laws; I'm sure it ain't my
fault.  Here's Dr Fillgrave, in a taking, and I'm quite ready to pay
him--quite.  If a man gets paid, what more can he want?'  And she again
held out the five-pound note over Dr Fillgrave's head.

What more, indeed, Lady Scatcherd, can any of us want, if only we could
keep our tempers and feelings a little in abeyance?  Dr Fillgrave,
however, could not so keep his; and, therefore, he did want something
more, though at the present moment he could hardly have said what.

Lady Scatcherd's courage was somewhat resuscitated by the presence of
her ancient trusty ally; and, moreover, she began to conceive that the
little man before her was unreasonable beyond all conscience with his
anger, seeing that that for which he was ready to work had been offered
him without any work at all.

'Madam,' said he, again turning round at Lady Scatcherd, 'I was never
before treated in such a way in any house in Barchester--never--never.'

'Good heavens, Dr Fillgrave!' said he of Greshamsbury, 'what is the
matter?'

'I'll let you know what is the matter, sir,' said he, turning round
again as quickly as before.  'I'll let you know what is the matter. 
I'll publish this, sir, to the medical world;' and as he shrieked out
the words of the threat, he stood on tiptoes and brandished his
eye-glasses up almost into his enemy's face.

'Don't be angry with Dr Thorne,' said Lady Scatcherd.  'Any ways, you
needn't be angry with him.  If you must be angry with anybody--'

'I shall be angry with him, madam,' ejaculated Dr Fillgrave, making
another sudden demi-pirouette.  'I am angry with him--or, rather, I
despise him;' and completing the circle, Dr Fillgrave again brought
himself round in full front of his foe.

Dr Thorne raised his eyebrows and looked inquiringly at Lady Scatcherd;
but there was a quiet sarcastic motion round his mouth which by no
means had the effect of throwing oil on the troubled waters.

'I'll publish the whole of this transaction to the medical world, Dr
Thorne--the whole of it; and if that has not the effect of rescuing the
people of Greshamsbury out of your hands, then--then--then, I don't know
what will.  Is my carriage--that is, the post-chaise there?' and Dr
Fillgrave, speaking very loudly, turned majestically to one of the 
servants.

'What have I done to you, Dr Fillgrave,' said Dr Thorne, now absolutely
laughing, 'that you should determined to take the bread out of my
mouth?  I am not interfering with your patient. I have come here simply
with reference to money matters appertaining to Sir Roger.'

'Money matters!  Very well--very well; money matters.  That is your idea
of medical practice.  Very well--very well.  Is my post-chaise at the
door?  I'll publish it all to the medical world--every word--every word
of it, every word of it.'

'Publish what, you unreasonable man?'

'Man! sir; whom do you call a man?  I'll let you know whether I'm a
man--post-chaise there!'

'Don't 'ee call him names now, doctor; don't 'ee pray don't 'ee,' said
Lady Scatcherd.

By this time they had all got somewhere nearer the hall-door; but the
Scatcherd retainers were too fond of the row to absent themselves
willingly at Dr Fillgrave's bidding, and it did not appear that any one
went in search of the post-chaise.

'Man! sir; I'll let you know what it is to speak to me in that style. I
think, sir, you hardly know who I am.'

'All that I know of you at present is, that you are my friend Sir
Roger's physician, and I cannot conceive what has occurred to make you
so angry.'  And as he spoke, Dr Thorne looked carefully at him to see
whether that pump-discipline had in truth been applied.  There were no
signs whatever that cold water had been thrown upon Dr Fillgrave.

'My post-chaise--is may post-chaise there?  The medical world shall know
all; you may be sure, sir, the medical world shall know it all;' and
thus, ordering his post-chaise and threatening Dr Thorne with the
medical world, Dr Fillgrave made his way to the door.

But the moment he put on his hat he returned.  'No, madam,' said he. 
'No; quite out of the question: such an affair is not to be arranged by
such means.  I'll publish it all to the medical world--post-chaise
there!' and then, using all his force, he flung as far as he could into
the hall a light bit of paper.  It fell at Dr Thorne's feet, who,
raising it, found that it was a five-pound note.

'I put it into his hat just while he was in his tantrum,' said Lady
Scatcherd.  'And I thought that perhaps he would not find it till he
got to Barchester.  Well I wish he'd been paid, certainly, although Sir
Roger wouldn't see him;' and in this manner Dr Thorne got some glimpse
of understanding into the cause of the great offence.

'I wonder whether Sir Roger will see me,' said he, laughing.



CHAPTER XIII

THE TWO UNCLES

'Ha! ha! ha!  Ha! ha! ha!' laughed Sir Roger, lustily, as Dr Thorne
entered the room.  'Well, if that ain't rich, I don't know what is. Ha!
ha! ha!  But why didn't they put him under the pump, doctor?'

The doctor, however, had too much tact, and too many things of
importance to say, to allow of his giving up much time to the
discussion of Dr Fillgrave's wrath.  He had come determined to open the
baronet's eyes as to what would be the real effect of his will, and he
had also to negotiate a loan for Mr Gresham, if that might be
possible.  Dr Thorne therefore began about the loan, that being the
easier subject, and found that Sir Roger was quite clear-headed as to
his many money concerns, in spite of his illness.  Sir Roger was
willing enough to lend Mr Gresham more money--six, eight, ten, twenty
thousand; but then, in doing so, he should insist on possession of the
title-deeds.

'What! the title-deeds of Greshamsbury for a few thousand pounds?' said
the doctor.

'I don't know whether you call ninety thousand pounds a few thousands;
but the debt will about amount to that.'

'Ah! that's the old debt.'

'Old and new together, of course; every shilling I lend more weakens my
security for what I have lent before.'

'But you have the first claim, Sir Roger.'

'It ought to be first and last to cover such a debt as that. If he
wants further accommodation, he must part with his deeds, doctor.'

The point was argued backwards and forwards for some time without
avail, and the doctor then thought it well to introduce the other
subject.

'Sir Roger, you're a hard man.'

'No I ain't,' said Sir Roger; 'not a bit hard; that is, not a bit too
hard.  Money is always hard.  I know I found it hard to come by; and
there is no reason why Squire Gresham should expect to find me so very
soft.'

'Very well; there is an end of that.  I thought you would have done as
much to oblige me, that is all.'

'What! take bad security too oblige you?'

'Well, there's an end of that.'

'I'll tell you what; I'll do as much to oblige a friend as any one. 
I'll lend you five thousand pounds, you yourself, without security at
all, if you want it.'

'But you know I don't want it; or, at any rate, shan't take it.'

'But to ask me to go on lending money to a third party, and he over
head and ears in debt, by way of obliging you, why, it's a little too
much.'

'Well, there's and end of it.  Now I've something to say to you about
that will of yours.'

'Oh! that's settled.'

'No, Scatcherd; it isn't settled.  It must be a great deal more settled
before we have done with it, as you'll find when you hear what I have
to tell you.'

'What you have to tell me!' said Sir Roger, sitting up in bed; 'and
what have you to tell me?'

'Your will says you sister's eldest child.'

'Yes; but that's only in the event of Louis Philippe dying before he is
twenty-five.'

'Exactly; and now I know something about your sister's eldest child,
and, therefore, I have come to tell you.'

'You know something about Mary's eldest child?'

'I do, Scatcherd; it is a strange story, and maybe it will make you
angry.  I cannot help it if it does so.  I should not tell you this if
I could avoid it; but as I do tell you, for your sake, as you will see,
and not for my own, I must implore you not to tell my secret to
others.'

Sir Roger now looked at him with an altered countenance.  There was
something in his voice of the authoritative tone of other days,
something in the doctor's look which had on the baronet the same effect
which in former days it had sometimes had on the stone-mason.

'Can you give me a promise, Scatcherd, that what I am about to tell you
shall not be repeated?'

'A promise!  Well, I don't know what it's about, you know.  I don't
like promises in the dark.'

'Then I must leave it to your honour; for what I have to say must be
said.  You remember my brother, Scatcherd?'

Remember his brother! thought the rich man to himself.  The name of the
doctor's brother had not been alluded to between them since the days of
that trial; but still it was impossible but that Scatcherd should well
remember him.

'Yes, yes; certainly.  I remember your brother,' said he.  'I remember
him well; there's no doubt about that.'

'Well, Scatcherd,' and, as he spoke, the doctor laid his hand with
kindness on the other's arm.  'Mary's eldest child was my brother's
child as well.

'But there is no such child living,' said Sir Roger; and, in his
violence, as he spoke he threw from off him the bedclothes, and tried
to stand up on the floor.  He found, however, that he had no strength
for such an effort, and was obliged to remain leaning on the bed and
resting on the doctor's arm.

'There was no such child ever lived,' said he.  'What do you mean by
this?'

Dr Thorne would say nothing further till he had got the man into bed
again.  This he at last affected, and then he went on with the story in
his own way.

'Yes, Scatcherd, that child is alive; and for fear that you should
unintentionally make her your heir, I have thought it right to tell you
this.'

'A girl, is it?'

'Yes, a girl.'

'And why should you want to spite her?  If she is Mary's child, she is
your brother's child also.  If she is my niece, she must be your niece
also.  Why should you want to spite her?  Why should you try to do her
such a terrible injury?'

'I do not want to spite her.'

'Where is she?  Who is she?  What is she called?  Where does she live?'

The doctor did not at once answer all these questions.  He had made up
his mind that he would tell Sir Roger that this child was living, but
he had not as yet resolved to make known all the circumstances of her
history.  He was not even yet quite aware whether it would be necessary
to say that this foundling orphan was the cherished darling of his own 
house.

'Such a child, is, at any rate, living,' said he; 'of that I give you
my assurance; and under your will, as now worded, it might come to pass
that that child should be your heir.  I do not want to spite her, but I
should be wrong to let you make your will without such knowledge,
seeing that I am in possession of it myself.'

'But where is the girl?'

'I do not know that that signifies.'

'Signifies!  Yes; it does signify, a great deal.  But, Thorne, Thorne,
now that I remember it, now that I can think of things, it was--was it
not you yourself who told me that the baby did not live?'

'Very possibly.'

'And was it a lie that you told me?'

'If so, yes.  But it is no lie that I tell you now.'

'I believed you then, Thorne; then, when I was a poor, broken-down
day-labourer, lying in jail, rotting there; but I tell you fairly, I do
not believe you now.  You have some scheme in this.'

'Whatever scheme I may have, you can frustrate by making another will. 
What can I gain by telling you this?  I only do so to induce you to be
more explicit in naming your heir.'

They both remained silent for a while, during which the baronet poured
out from his hidden resource a glass of brandy and swallowed it.

'When a man is taken aback suddenly by such tidings as these, he must
take a drop of something, eh, doctor?'

Dr Thorne did not seen the necessity; but the present, he felt, was no
time for arguing the point.

'Come, Thorne, where is the girl?  You must tell me that.  She is my
niece, and I have a right to know.  She shall come here, and I will do
something for her.  By the Lord!  I would as soon she had the money as
anyone else, if she's anything of a good 'un;--some of it, that is.  Is
she a good 'un?'

'Good!' said the doctor, turning away his face.  'Yes; she is good
enough.'

'She must be grown up by now.  None of your light skirts, eh?'

'She is a good girl,' said the doctor somewhat loudly and sternly.  He
could hardly trust himself to say much on this point.

'Mary was a good girl, a very good girl, till'--and Sir Roger raised
himself up in his bed with his fist clenched, as though he were again
about to strike that fatal blow at the farm-yard gate.  'But come, it's
no good thinking of that; you behaved well and manly, always.  And so
poor Mary's child is alive; at least, you say so.'

'I say so, and you may believe it.  Why should I deceive you?'

'No, no; I don't see why.  But then why did you deceive me before?'

To this the doctor chose to make no answer, and again there was silence
for a while.

'What do you call her, doctor?'

'Her name is Mary.'

'The prettiest women's name going; there's no name like it,' said the
contractor, with an unusual tenderness in his voice. 'Mary--yes; but
Mary what?  What other name does she go by?'

Here the doctor hesitated.

'Mary Scatcherd--eh?'

'No.  Not Mary Scatcherd.'

'Not Mary Scatcherd!  Mary what, then?  you, with your d--- pride,
wouldn't let her be called Mary Thorne, I know.'

This was too much for the doctor.  He felt that there were tears in his
eyes, so he walked away to the window to dry them, unseen.  He had
fifty names, each more sacred than the other, the most sacred of them
all would hardly have been good enough for her.

'Mary what, doctor?  Come, if the girl is to belong to me, if I am to
provide for her, I must know what to call her, and where to look for
her.'

'Who talked of your providing for her?,' said the doctor, turning round
at the rival uncle.  'Who said that she was to belong to you?  She will
be no burden to you; you are only told of this that you may not leave
your money to her without knowing it.  She is provided for--that is, 
she wants nothing; she will do well enough; you need not trouble 
yourself about her.'

'But is she's Mary's child, Mary's child in real truth, I will trouble
myself about her.  Who else should do so?  For the matter of that, I'd
soon say her as any of those others in America.  What do I care about
blood?  I shan't mind her being a bastard.  That is to say, of course,
if she's decently good. Did she ever get any kind of teaching; 
book-learning, or anything of that sort?'

Dr Thorne at this moment hated his friend the baronet with almost a
deadly hatred; that he, rough brute as he was--for he was a rough
brute--that he should speak in such language of the angel who gave to
that home in Greshamsbury so many of the joys of Paradise--that he
should speak of her as in some degree his own, that he should inquire
doubtingly as to her attributes and her virtues.  And then the doctor
thought of her Italian and French readings, of her music, of her nice 
books, and sweet lady ways, of her happy companionship with Patience
Oriel, and her dear, bosom friendship with Beatrice Gresham.  He
thought of her grace, and winning manners, and soft, polished feminine
beauty; and, as he did so, he hated Sir Roger Scatcherd, and regarded
him with loathing, as he might have regarded a wallowing-hog.

At last a light seemed to break in upon Sir Roger's mind.  Dr Thorne,
he perceived, did not answer his last question.  He perceived, also,
that the doctor was affected with some more than ordinary emotion.  Why
should it be that this subject of Mary Scatcherd's child moved him so
deeply?  Sir Roger had never been at the doctor's house at
Greshamsbury, had never seen Mary Thorne, but he had heard that there
lived with the doctor some young female relative; and thus a glimmering
light seemed to come in upon Sir Roger's bed.

He had twitted the doctor with his pride; had said that it was
impossible that the girl should be called Mary Thorne.  What if she
were so called?  What if she were now warming herself at the doctor's
hearth?

'Well, come, Thorne, what is it you call her?  Tell it out, man.  And,
look you, if it's your name she bears, I shall think more of you, a
deal more than ever I did yet.  Come, Thorne, I'm her uncle too.  I
have a right to know.  She is Mary Thorne, isn't she?'

The doctor had not the hardihood nor the resolution to deny it. 'Yes,'
said he, 'that is her name; she lives with me.'

'Yes, and lives with all those grand folks at Greshamsbury too. I have
heard of that.'

'She lives with me, and belongs to me, and is as my daughter.'

'She shall come over here.  Lady Scatcherd shall have her to stay with
her.  She shall come to us.  And as for my will, I'll make another. 
I'll--'

'Yes, make another will--or else alter that one.  But as to Miss Thorne
coming here--'

'What!  Mary--'

'Well, Mary.  As to Mary Thorne coming here, that I fear will not be
possible.  She cannot have two homes.  She has cast her lot with one of
her uncles, and she must remain with him now.'

'Do you mean to say that she must have any relation but one?'

'But one such as I am.  She would not be happy over here.  She does not
like new faces.  You have enough depending on you; I have but her.'

'Enough! why, I have only Louis Philippe.  I could provide for a dozen
girls.'

'Well, well, well, we will not talk about that.'

'Ah! but, Thorne, you have told me of this girl now, and I cannot but
talk of her.  If you wished to keep the matter dark, you should have
said nothing about it.  She is my niece as much as yours.  And, Thorne,
I loved my sister Mary quite as well as you loved your brother; quite
as well.'

Any one who might have heard and seen the contractor would have hardly
thought him to be the same man who, a few hours before, was urging that
the Barchester physician should be put under the pump.

'You have your son, Scatcherd.  I have no one but that girl.'

'I don't want to take her from you.  I don't want to take her; but
surely there can be no harm in her coming here to see us? I can provide
for her, Thorne, remember that.  I can provide for her without
reference to Louis Philippe.  What are ten or fifteen thousand pounds
to me?  Remember that, Thorne.'

Dr Thorne did remember it.  In that interview he remembered many
things, and much passed through his mind on which he felt himself
compelled to resolve somewhat too suddenly.  Would he be justified in
rejecting, on behalf of Mary, the offer of pecuniary provision which
this rich relative would be so well inclined to make?  Or, if he
accepted ti, would be in truth be studying her interests?  Scatcherd
was a self-willed, obstinate man--now indeed touched by unwonted 
tenderness; but he was one of those whose lasting tenderness Dr Thorne
would be very unwilling to trust his darling.  He did resolve, that on
the whole he should best discharge his duty, even to her, by keeping
her to himself, and rejecting, on her behalf, any participation in the
baronet's wealth.  As Mary herself had said, 'some people must be bound
together;' and their destiny, that of himself and his niece, seemed to 
have so bound them.  She had found her place at Greshamsbury, her place
in the world; and it would be better for her now to keep it, than to go
forth and seek another that would be richer, but at the same time less
suited to her.

'No, Scatcherd,' he said at last, 'she cannot come here; she would not
be happy here, and, to tell the truth I do not wish her to know that
she has other relatives.'

'Ah! she would be ashamed of her mother, you mean, and of her mother's
brother too, eh?  She's too fine a lady, I suppose, to take me by the
hand and give me a kiss, and call me her uncle? I and Lady Scatcherd
would not be grand enough for her, eh?'

'You may say what you please, Scatcherd: I of course cannot stop you.'

'But I don't know how you'll reconcile what you are doing with your
conscience.  What right can you have to throw away the girl's chance,
now that she has a chance?  What fortune can you give her?'

'I have done what little I could,' said Thorne, proudly.

'Well, well, well, well, I never heard such a thing in my life; never. 
Mary's child, my own Mary's child, and I'm not to see her!  But,
Thorne, I tell you what; I will see her.  I'll go over to her, I'll go
to Greshamsbury, and tell her who I am, and what I can do for her.  I
tell you fairly I will.  You shall not keep her away from those who
belong to her, and can do her a good turn.  Mary's daughter; another 
Mary Scatcherd! I almost wish she were called Mary Scatcherd. Is she
like her, Thorne?  Come tell me that; is she like her mother.'

'I do not remember her mother; at least not in health.'

'Not remember her! ah, well.  She was the handsomest girl in 
Barchester, anyhow.  That was given up to her.  Well, I didn't think to
be talking of her again.  Thorne, you cannot but expect that I shall go
over and see Mary's child?'

'Now, Scatcherd, look here,' and the doctor, coming away from the
window, where he had been standing, sat himself down by the bedside,
'you must not come over to Greshamsbury.'

'Oh! but I shall.'

'Listen to me, Scatcherd.  I do not want to praise myself in any way;
but when that girl was an infant, six months old, she was like to be a
thorough obstacle to her mother's fortune in life.  Tomlinson was
willing to marry your sister, but he would not marry the child too. Then
I took the baby, and I promised her mother that I would be to her as a
father. I have kept my word as fairly as I have been able.  She has sat
at my hearth, and drunk of my cup, and been to me as my own child. 
After that, I have the right to judge what is best for her.  Her life
is not like your life, and her ways are not as your ways--'

'Ah, that is just it; we are too vulgar for her.'

'You may take it as you will,' said the doctor, who was too much in
earnest to be in the least afraid of offending his companion.  'I have
not said so; but I do say that you and she are unlike in the way of
living.'

'She wouldn't like an uncle with a brandy bo