ttle under his head, eh?'

'You could not see her without letting her know what is the connexion
between you; of that I wish to keep her in ignorance.'

'I never knew any one yet who is ashamed of a rich connexion. How do
you mean to get a husband for her, eh?'

'I have told you of her existence,' continued the doctor, not appearing
to notice what the baronet had last said, 'because I found it necessary
that you should know the fact of your sister having left a child behind
her; you would otherwise have made a will different from that intended,
and there might have been a lawsuit, and mischief, and misery when we 
are gone.  You must perceive that I have done this in honesty to you;
and you yourself are too honest to repay me by taking advantage of this
knowledge to make me unhappy.'

'Oh, very well, doctor.  At any rate, you are a brick, I will say
that.  But I'll think of this, I'll think of it; but it does startle me
to find that poor Mary has a child living so near to me.'

'And now, Scatcherd, I will say good-bye.  We part as friends, don't
we?'

'Oh, but doctor, you ain't going to leave me so.  What am I to do? What
doses shall I take?  How much brandy may I drink?  May I have a grill
for dinner?  D--- me, doctor, you have turned Fillgrave out of the
house.  You mustn't go and desert me.'

Dr Thorne laughed, and then, sitting himself down to write medically,
gave such prescriptions and ordinances as he found to be necessary. 
They announced but to this: that the man was to drink, if possible, no
brandy; and if that were not possible, then as little as might be.

This having been done, the doctor again proceeded to take his leave;
but when he got to the door he was called back.  'Thorne!  Thorne! 
About that money for Mr Gresham; do what you like, do just what you
like.  Ten thousand is it?  Well, he shall have it.  I'll make
Winterbones write about it at once. Five per cent., isn't it?  No, four
and a half.  Well, he shall have ten thousand more.'

'Thank you, Scatcherd, thank you, I am really very much obliged to you,
I am indeed.  I wouldn't ask it if I was not sure your money is safe. 
Good-bye, old fellow, and get rid of that bedfellow of yours,' and
again he was at the door.

'Thorne,' said Sir Roger once more.  'Thorne, just come back for a
minute.  You wouldn't let me send a present would you--fifty pounds or
so,--just to buy a few flounces?'

The doctor contrived to escape without giving a definite answer to this
question; and then, having paid his compliments to Lady Scatcherd,
remounted his cob and rode back to Greshamsbury.



CHAPTER XIV

SENTENCE OF EXILE

Dr Thorne did not at once go home to his own house.  When he reached
the Greshamsbury gates, he sent his horse to its own stable by one of
the people at the lodge, and then walked on to the mansion.  He had to
see the squire on the subject of the forthcoming loan, and he had also
to see the Lady Arabella.

The Lady Arabella, though she was not personally attached to the doctor
with quite so much warmth as some others of her family, still had
reasons of her own for not dispensing with his visits to the house. She
was one of his patients, and a patient fearful of the disease with
which she was threatened. Though she thought the doctor to be arrogant,
deficient as to properly submissive demeanour towards herself, an
instigator to marital parsimony in her lord, one altogether opposed to 
herself and her interest in Greshamsbury politics, nevertheless she did
feel trust in him as a medical man.  She had no wish to be rescued out
of his hands by any Dr Fillgrave, as regarded that complaint of hers,
much as she may have desired, and did desire, to sever him from all 
Greshamsbury councils in all matters not touching the healing art.

Now the complaint of which the Lady Arabella was afraid, was cancer:
and her only present confidant in this matter was Dr Thorne.

The first of the Greshamsbury circle whom he saw was Beatrice, and he
met her in the garden.

'Oh, doctor,' said she, 'where has Mary been this age?  She has not
been up here since Frank's birthday.'

'Well, that was only three days ago.  Why don't you go down and ferret
her out in the village?'

'So I have done.  I was there just now, and found her out.  She was out
with Patience Oriel.  Patience is all and all with her now.  Patience
is all very well, but if they throw me over--'

'My dear Miss Gresham, Patience is and always was a virtue.'

'A poor, beggarly, sneaking virtue after all, doctor.  They should have
come up, seeing how deserted I am here.  There's absolutely nobody
left.'

'Has Lady de Courcy gone?'

'Oh, yes!  All the De Courcys have gone.  I think, between ourselves,
Mary stays away because she does not love them too well.  They have all
gone, and taken Augusta and Frank with them.'

'Has Frank gone to Courcy Castle?'

'Oh, yes; did you not hear?  There was rather a fight about it. Master
Frank wanted to get off, and was as hard to catch as an eel, and then
the countess was offended; and papa said he didn't see why Frank was to
go if he didn't like it.  Papa is very anxious about his degree, you
know.'

The doctor understood it all as well as though it had been described to
him at full length.  The countess had claimed her prey, in order that
she might carry him off to Miss Dunstable's golden embrace.  The prey,
not yet old enough and wise enough to connect the worship of Plutus
with that of Venus, had made sundry futile feints and dodges in the
vain hope of escape.  Then the anxious mother had enforced the De 
Courcy behests with all a mother's authority.  But the father, whose
ideas on the subject of Miss Dunstable's wealth had probably not been
consulted, had, as a matter of course, taken exactly the other side of
the question.  The doctor did not require to be told all this in order
to know how the battle had raged.  He had not yet heard of the great 
Dunstable scheme; but he was sufficiently acquainted with Greshamsbury
tactics to understand that the war had been carried on somewhat after
this fashion.

As a rule, when the squire took a point warmly to heart, he was wont to
carry his way against the De Courcy interest. He could be obstinate
enough when it so pleased him, and had before now gone so far as to tell
his wife, that her thrice-noble sister-in-law might remain at home at
Courcy Castle--or, at any rate, not come to Greshamsbury--if she could
not do so without striving to rule him and every one else when she got
here. This had of course been repeated to the countess, who had merely
replied to it by a sisterly whisper, in which she sorrowfully intimated
that some men were born brutes, and always would remain so.

'I think they all are,' the Lady Arabella had replied; wishing,
perhaps, to remind her sister-in-law that the breed of brutes was as
rampant in West Barsetshire as in the eastern division of that county.

The squire, however, had not fought on this occasion with all his
vigour.  There had, of course, been some passages between him and his
son, and it had been agreed that Frank should go for a fortnight to
Courcy Castle.

'We mustn't quarrel with them, you know, if we can help it,' said the
father; 'and, therefore, you must go sooner or later.'

'Well, I suppose so; but you don't know how dull it is, governor.'

'Don't I!' said Gresham.

'There's a Miss Dunstable to be there; did you ever hear of her, sir?'

'No, never.'

'She's a girl whose father used to make ointment, or something of that
sort.'

'Oh, yes, to be sure; the ointment of Lebanon.  He used to cover all
the walls of London.  I haven't heard of him this year past.'

'No; that is because he's dead.  Well, she carries on the ointment now,
I believe; at any rate, she has got all the money.  I wonder what she's
like?'

'You'd better go and see,' said the father, who now began to have some
inkling of an idea why the two ladies were so anxious to carry his son
off to Courcy Castle at this exact time.  And so Frank had packed up his
best clothes, given a last fond look at the new black horse, repeated
his last special injunctions to Peter, and had then made one of the 
stately cortege which proceeded through the county from Greshamsbury to
Courcy Castle.

'I am very glad of that, very,' said the squire, when he heard that the
money was to be forthcoming. 'I shall get it on easier terms from him
than elsewhere; and it kills me to have continual bother about such
things.' And Mr Gresham, feeling that that difficulty was tided over for
a time, and that the immediate pressure of little debts would be abated,
stretched himself on his easy chair as though he were quite
comfortable;--one may say almost elated.

How frequent it is that men on their road to ruin feel elation such as
this!  A man signs away moiety of his substance; nay, that were
nothing; but a moiety of the substance of his children; he puts his pen
to the paper that ruins him and them; but in doing so he frees himself
from a source of immediate little pestering, stinging troubles: and, 
therefore, feels as though fortune has been almost kind to him.

The doctor felt angry with himself for what he had done when he saw how
easily the squire adapted himself to this new loan.  'It will make
Scatcherd's claim upon you very heavy,' said he.

Mr Gresham at once read all that was passing through the doctor's
mind.  'Well, what else can I do?' said he.  'You wouldn't have me
allow my daughter to lose this match for the sake of a few thousand
pounds?  It will be well at any rate to have one of them settled.  Look
at that letter from Moffat.'

The doctor took the letter and read it.  It was a long, wordy,
ill-written rigmarole, in which that amorous gentleman spoke with much
rapture of his love and devotion for Miss Gresham; but at the same time
declared, and most positively swore, that the adverse cruelty of his
circumstances was such, that it would not allow him to stand up like a
man at the hymeneal altar until six thousand pounds hard cash had been
paid down at his banker's.

'It may be all right,' said the squire; 'but in my time gentlemen were
not used to write such letters as that to each other.'

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.  He did not know how far he would be
justified in saying much, even to his friend the squire, in dispraise
of his future son-in-law.

'I told him that he should have the money; and one would have thought
that that would have been enough for him.  Well: I suppose Augusta
likes him.  I suppose she wishes the match; otherwise, I would give him
such an answer to that letter as would startle him a little.'

'What settlement is he to make?' said Thorne.

'Oh, that's satisfactory enough; couldn't be more so; a thousand a year
and the house at Wimbledon for her; that's all very well.  But such a
lie, you know, Thorne.  He's rolling in money, and yet he talks of this
beggarly sum as though he couldn't possibly stir without it.'

'If I might venture to speak my mind,' said Thorne.

'Well?' said the squire, looking at him earnestly.

'I should be inclined to say that Mr Moffat wants to cry off, himself.'

'Oh, impossible; quite impossible.  In the first place, he was so very
anxious for the match.  In the next place, it is such a great thing for
him.  And then, he would never dare; you see, he is dependent on the De
Courcys for his seat.'

'But suppose he loses his seat?'

'But there is not much fear of that, I think.  Scatcherd may be a very
fine fellow, but I think they'll hardly return him at Barchester.'

'I don't understand much about it,' said Thorne; 'but such things do
happen.'

'And you believe that this man absolutely wants to get off the match;
absolutely thinks of playing such a trick as that on my daughter;--on
me?'

'I don't say he intends to do it; but it looks to me as though he were
making a door for himself, or trying to make a door: if so, your having
the money will stop him there.'

'But, Thorne, don't you think he loves the girl?  If I thought not--'

The doctor was silent for a moment, and then he said, 'I am not a
love-making man myself, but I think that if I were much in love with a
young lady, I should not write such a letter as that to her father.'

'By heavens!  If I thought so,' said the squire--'but, Thorne, we can't
judge of those fellows as one does of gentlemen; they are so used to
making money, and seeing money made, that they have an eye to business
in everything.'

'Perhaps so, perhaps so,' muttered the doctor, showing evidently that
he still doubted the warmth of Mr Moffat's affection.

'The match was none of my making, and I cannot interfere now to break
it off: it will give her a good position in the world; for, after all,
money goes a great way, and it is something to be in Parliament.  I can
only hope she likes him.  I do truly hope she likes him;' and the
squire also showed by the tone of his voice that, though he might hope 
that his daughter was in love with her intended husband, he hardly
conceived it to be possible that she should be so.

And what was the truth of the matter?  Miss Gresham was no more in love
with Mr Moffat than you are--oh, sweet, young, blooming beauty!  Not a
whit more; not, at least, in your sense of the word, nor in mine.  She
had by no means resolved within her heart that of all the men whom she
had ever seen, or ever could see, he was far away the nicest and the
best.  That is what you will do when you are in love, if you be good 
for anything.  She had no longing to sit near to him--the nearer the
better; she had no thought of his taste and his choice when she bought
her ribbons and bonnets; she had not indescribable desire that all her
female friends should be ever talking to her about him.  When she wrote
to him, she did not copy her letters again and again, so that she might
be, as it were, ever speaking to him; she took no special pride in
herself because he had chosen her to be his life's partner.  In point
of fact, she did not care one straw about him.

And yet she thought she loved him; was, indeed, quite confident that
she did so; told her mother that she was sure Gustavus would wish this,
she knew Gustavus would like that, and so on; but as for Gustavus
himself, she did not care one chip about him.

She was in love with her match just as farmers are in love with wheat
and eighty shillings a quarter; or shareholders--innocent gudgeons--with
seven and half per cent interest on their paid up capital.  Eighty
shillings a quarter, and seven and half per cent interest, such were
the returns which she had been taught to look for in exchange for her
young heart; and, having obtained them, or being thus about to obtain 
them, why should not her young heart be satisfied?  Had she not sat
herself down obediently at the feet of her lady Gamaliel, and should
she not be rewarded?  Yes, indeed, she shall be rewarded.

And then the doctor went to the lady.  On their medical secrets we will
not intrude; but there were other matters bearing on the course of our
narrative, as to which Lady Arabella found it necessary to say a word
of so to the doctor; and it is essential that we should know what was
the tenor of those few words so spoken.

How the aspirations, and instincts, and feelings of a household become
changed as the young birds begin to flutter those feathered wings, and
have half-formed thoughts of leaving the parental nest!  A few months
back, Frank had reigned almost autocratic over the lesser subjects of
the kingdom of Greshamsbury.  The servants, for instance, always obeyed
him, and his sisters never dreamed of telling anything which he
directed should not be told.  All his mischief, all his troubles, and
all his loves were confided to them, with the sure conviction that they
would never be made to stand in evidence against him.

Trusting to this well-ascertained state of things, he had not hesitated
to declare his love for Miss Thorne before his sister Augusta.  But his
sister Augusta had now, as it were, been received into the upper house;
having duly profited by the lessons of her great instructress, she was
now admitted to sit in conclave with the higher powers: her sympathies,
of course, became changed, and her confidence was removed from the
young and giddy and given to the ancient and discreet.  She was as a
schoolboy, who, having finished his schooling, and being fairly forced
by necessity into the stern bread-earning world, undertakes the new
duties of tutoring.  Yesterday he was taught, and fought, of course,
against the schoolmaster; to-day he teaches, and fights as keenly for
him.  So it was with Augusta Gresham, when, with careful brow, she
whispered to her mother that there was something wrong between Frank 
and Mary Thorne.

'Stop it at once, Arabella: stop it at once,' the countess had said;
'that, indeed, will be the ruin.  If he does not marry money, he is
lost.  Good heavens! the doctor's niece!  A girl that nobody knows
where she comes from!'

'He's going with you to-morrow, you know,' said the anxious mother.

'Yes; and that is so far well: if he will be led by me, the evil may be
remedied before he returns; but it is very, very hard to lead young
men.  Arabella, you must forbid that girl to come to Greshamsbury again
on any pretext whatever.  The evil must be stopped at once.'

'But she is here so much as a matter of course.'

'Then she must be here as a matter of course no more: there has been
folly, very great folly, in having her here.  Of course she would turn
out to be a designing creature with such temptation before her; with
such a prize within her reach, how could she help it?'

'I must say, aunt, she answered him very properly,' said Augusta.

'Nonsense,' said the countess; 'before you of course she did. Arabella,
the matter must not be left to the girl's propriety. I never knew the
propriety of a girl of that sort to be fit to be depended on yet.  If
you wish to save the whole family from ruin, you must take steps to
keep her away from Greshamsbury now at once.  Now is the time; now that
Frank is going away.  Where so much, so very much depends on a young
man's marrying money, not one day ought to be lost.'

Instigated in this manner, Lady Arabella resolved to open her mind to
the doctor, and to make it intelligible to him, that under present
circumstances, Mary's visits at Greshamsbury had better be
discontinued.  She would have given much, however, to have escaped this
business.  She had in her time tried one or two falls with the doctor,
and she was conscious that she had never yet got the better of him: and
then she was in a slight degree afraid of Mary herself.  She had a 
presentiment that it would not be so easy to banish Mary from 
Greshamsbury: she was not sure that that young lady would not boldly
assert her right to her place in the school-room; appeal loudly to the
squire, and perhaps, declare her determination of marrying the heir,
out before them all.  The squire would be sure to uphold her in that,
or in anything else.

And then, too, there would be the greatest difficulty in wording her
request to the doctor; and Lady Arabella was sufficiently conscious of
her own weakness to know that she was not always very good at words. 
But the doctor, when hard pressed, was never at fault: he could say the
bitterest things in the quietest tone, and Lady Arabella had a great 
dread of these bitter things.  What, also, if he should desert her
himself; withdraw from her his skill and knowledge of her bodily wants
and ailments now that he was so necessary to her? She had once before
taken that measure of sending to Barchester for Dr Fillgrave, but it
had answered with her hardly better than with Sir Roger and Lady
Scatcherd.

When, therefore, Lady Arabella found herself alone with the doctor, and
called upon to say out in what best language she could select for the
occasion, she did not feel to very much at her ease.  There was that
about the man before her which cowed her, in spite of her being the
wife of the squire, the sister of an earl, a person quite acknowledged
to be of the great world, and the mother of a very important young man 
whose affections were now about to be called in question.  
Nevertheless, there was the task to be done, and with a mother's
courage she essayed it.

'Dr Thorne,' said she, as soon as their medical conference was at an
end, 'I am very glad you came over to-day, for I have something special
which I wanted to say to you:' so far she got, and then stopped; but,
as the doctor did not seem inclined to give her any assistance, she was
forced to flounder on as best she could.

'Something very particular indeed.  You know what a respect and esteem,
and I may say affection, we all have for you,'--here the doctor made a
low bow--'and I may say for Mary also;' here the doctor bowed himself
again.  'We have done what little we could to be pleasant neighbours,
and I think you'll believe me when I say that I am a true friend to you
and dear Mary--'

The doctor knew that something very unpleasant was coming, but he could
not at all guess what might be its nature.  He felt, however, that he
must say something; so he expressed a hope that he was duly sensible of
all the acts of kindness he had ever received from the squire and the
family at large.

'I hope, therefore, my dear doctor, you won't take amiss what I am
going to say.'

'Well, Lady Arabella, I'll endeavour not to do so.'

'I am sure I would not give any pain if I could help it, much less to
you.  But there are occasions, doctor, in which duty must be paramount;
paramount to all other considerations, you know, and, certainly, this
occasion is one of them.'

'But what is the occasion, Lady Arabella?'

'I'll tell you, doctor.  You know what Frank's position is?'

'Frank's position?'

'Why his position in life; an only son, you know.'

'Oh, yes; I know his position in that respect; an only son, and his
father's heir; and a very fine fellow, he is. You have but one son, Lady
Arabella, and you may well be proud of him.'

Lady Arabella sighed.  She did not wish at the present moment to
express herself as being in any way proud of Frank.  She was desirous
rather, on the other hand, of showing that she was a good deal ashamed
of him; only not quite so much ashamed of him as it behoved the doctor
to be of his niece.'

'Well, perhaps so; yes,' said Lady Arabella, 'he is, I believe, a very
good young man, with an excellent disposition; but, doctor, his
position is very precarious; and he is just at that time of life when
caution is necessary.'

To the doctor's ears, Lady Arabella was now talking of her son as a
mother might of her infant when whooping-cough was abroad our croup
imminent.  'There is nothing on earth the matter with him, I should
say,' said the doctor.  'He has every possible sign of perfect health.'

'Oh yes; his health!  Yes, thank God, his health is good; that is a
great blessing.'  And Lady Arabella thought of her four flowerets that
had already faded.  'I am sure I am most thankful to see him growing up
so strong.  But it is not that I mean, doctor.'

'Then what is it, Lady Arabella?'

'Why, doctor, the squire's position with regard to money matters.'

Now the doctor undoubtedly did know the squire's position with regard
to money matters,--knew it much better than Lady Arabella; but he was by
no means inclined to talk on that subject to her ladyship.  He remained
quite silent, therefore, although Lady Arabella's last speech had taken
the form of a question.  Lady Arabella was a little offended at this
want of freedom on his part, and become somewhat sterner in her tone--a
thought less condescending in her manner.

'The squire has unfortunately embarrassed the property, and Frank must
look forward to inherit it with very heavy encumbrances; I fear very
heavy indeed, though of what exact nature I am kept in ignorance.'

Looking at the doctor's face, she perceived that there was no 
probability whatever that her ignorance would be enlightened by him.

'And, therefore, it is highly necessary that Frank should be very
careful.'

'As to his private expenditure, you mean?' said the doctor.

'No; not exactly that: though of course he must be careful as to that,
too; that's of course.  But that is not what I mean, doctor; his only
hope of retrieving his circumstances is by marrying money.'

'With every other conjugal blessing that a man can have, I hope he may
have that also.'  So the doctor replied with imperturbable face; but
not the less did he begin to have a shade of suspicion of what might be
the coming subject of the conference.  It would be untrue to say that
he had ever thought it probable that the young heir should fall in love
with his niece; that he had ever looked forward to such a chance,
either with complacency or with fear; nevertheless, the idea had of
late passed through his mind.  Some word had fallen from Mary, some
closely watched expression of her eye, or some quiver in her lip when
Frank's name was mentioned, had of late made him involuntarily think
that such a thing might not be impossible; and then, when the chance of
Mary becoming the heiress to so large a fortune had been forced upon
his consideration, he had been unable to prevent himself from building
happy castles in the air, as he rode slowly home from Boxall Hill.  But
not a whit the more on that account was he prepared to be untrue to the
squire's interest or to encourage a feeling which must be distasteful
to all the squire's friends.

'Yes, doctor; he must marry money.'

'And worth, Lady Arabella; and a pure feminine heart; and youth and
beauty.  I hope he will marry them all.'

Could it be possible, that in speaking of a pure feminine heart, and
youth and beauty, and such like gewgaws, the doctor was thinking of his
niece?  Could it be that he had absolutely made up his mind to foster
and encourage this odious match?

The bare idea made Lady Arabella wrathful, and her wrath gave her
courage.  'He must marry money, or he will be a ruined man. Now,
doctor, I am informed that things--words that is--have passed between
him and Mary which never ought to have been allowed.'

And now the doctor was wrathful.  'What things? what words?' said he,
appearing to Lady Arabella as though he rose in his anger nearly a foot
in altitude before her eyes.  'What has passed between them? and who
says so?'

'Doctor, there have been love-makings, you may take my word for it;
love-makings of a very, very advanced description.'

This, the doctor could not stand.  No, not for Greshamsbury and its
heir; not for the squire and all his misfortunes; not for Lady Arabella
and the blood of the De Courcys could he stand quiet and hear Mary
accused.  He sprang up another foot in height, and expanded equally in
width as he flung back the insinuation.

'Who says so?  Whoever says so, whoever speaks of Miss Thorne in such
language, says what is not true.  I will pledge my word--'

'My dear doctor, my dear doctor, what took place was quite clearly
heard; there was no mistake about it, indeed.'

'What took place?  What was heard?'

'Well, then, I don't want, you know, to make more of it than can be
helped.  The thing must be stopped, that is all.'

'What thing?  Speak out, Lady Arabella.  I will not have Mary's conduct
impugned by innuendoes.  What is that eavesdroppers have heard?'

Dr Thorne, there have been no eavesdroppers.'

'And not talebearers either?  Will you ladyship oblige me by letting me
know what is this accusation which you bring against my niece?'

'There has been most positively an offer made, Dr Thorne.'

'And who made it?'

'Oh, of course I am not going to say but what Frank must have been very
imprudent.  Of course he has been to blame.  There has been fault on
both sides, no doubt.'

'I utterly deny it.  I positively deny it.  I know nothing of the
circumstances; have heard nothing about it--'

'Then of course you can't say,' said Lady Arabella.

'I know nothing of the circumstance; have heard nothing about it,'
continued Dr Thorne; 'but I do know my niece, and am ready to assert
that there has not been fault on both sides. Whether there has been any
fault on any side, that I do not know.'

'I can assure you, Dr Thorne, that an offer was made by Frank; such an
offer cannot be without its allurements to a young lady circumstanced
like your niece.'

'Allurements!' almost shouted the doctor, and, as he did so, Lady
Arabella stepped back a pace or two, retreating from the fire which
shot out of his eyes.  'But the truth is, Lady Arabella, you do not
know my niece.  If you will have the goodness to let me understand what
it is that you desire I will tell you whether I can comply with your
wishes.'

'Of course it will be very inexpedient that the young people should be
thrown together again;--for the present, I mean.'

'Well!'

'Frank has now gone to Courcy Castle; and he talks of going from thence
to Cambridge.  But he will doubtless be here, backwards and forwards;
and perhaps it will be better for all parties--safer, that is, doctor--if
Miss Thorne were to discontinue her visits to Greshamsbury for a
while.'

'Very well!' thundered out the doctor.  'Her visits to Greshamsbury
shall be discontinued.'

'Of course, doctor, this won't change intercourse between us; between
you and the and the family.'

'Not change it!' said he.  'Do you think that I will break bread in a
house from whence she has been ignominiously banished?  Do you think
that I can sit in friendship with those who have spoken of her as you
have now spoken?  You have many daughters; what would you say if I
accused them one of them as you have accused her?'

'Accused, doctor!  No, I don't accuse her.  But prudence, you know,
does sometimes require us--'

'Very well; prudence requires you to look after those who belong to
you.  And prudence requires me to look after my one lamb.  Good
morning, Lady Arabella.'

'But, doctor, you are not going to quarrel with us?  You will come when
we want you; eh! won't you?'

Quarrel! quarrel with Greshamsbury!  Angry as he was, the doctor felt
that he could ill bear to quarrel with Greshamsbury.  A man past fifty
cannot easily throw over the ties that have taken twenty years to form,
and wrench himself away from the various close ligatures with which, in
such a period, he has become bound.  He could not quarrel with the 
squire; he could ill bear to quarrel with Frank; though he now began to
conceive that Frank had used him badly, he could not do so; he could
not quarrel with the children, who had almost been born into his arms;
nor even with the very walls, and trees, and grassy knolls with which
he was so dearly intimate. He could not proclaim himself an enemy to 
Greshamsbury; and yet he felt that fealty to Mary required of him that,
for the present, he should put on an enemy's guise.

'If you want me, Lady Arabella, and send for me, I will come to you;
otherwise, if you please, share the sentence which has been passed on
Mary.  I will now wish you good morning.' And then bowing low to her,
he left the room and the house, and sauntered slowly away to his own
home.

What was he to say to Mary?  He walked very slowly, down the 
Greshamsbury avenue with his hands clasped behind his back, thinking
over the whole matter; thinking of it, or rather trying to think of
it.  When a man's heart is warmly concerned in any matter, it is almost
useless for him to endeavour to think of it.  Instead of thinking, he
gives play to his feelings, and feeds his passion by indulging it.  
'Allurements!' he said to himself, repeating Lady Arabella's words.  'A
girl circumstanced like my niece!  How utterly incapable is such a
woman as that to understand the mind, and the heart, and soul of such a
one as Mary Thorne!'  And then his thoughts recurred to Frank.  'It has
been ill done of him; ill done of him: young as he is, he should have
had feeling enough to spared me this.  A thoughtless word has been
spoken which will now make her miserable!'  And then, as he walked on,
he could not divest his mind of the remembrance of what had passed
between him and Sir Roger.  What, if after all, Mary should become the
heiress to all that money?  What, if she should become, in fact, the
owner of Greshamsbury?  for, indeed it seemed too possible that Sir
Roger's heir would be the owner of Greshamsbury.

The idea was one which he disliked to entertain, but it would recur to
him again and again.  It might be, that a marriage between his niece
and the nominal heir to the estate might be of all the matches the best
for young Gresham to make.  How sweet would be the revenge, how
glorious the retaliation on Lady Arabella, if, after what had now been
said, it should come to pass that all the difficulties of Greshamsbury
should be made smooth by Mary's love, and Mary's hand!  It was a 
dangerous subject on which to ponder.  And, as he sauntered down the
road, the doctor did his best to banish it from his mind--not altogether
successfully.

But as he went he again encountered Beatrice.  'Tell Mary I went up to
her to-day,' said she, 'and that I expect her up here to-morrow.  If
she does not come here, I shall be savage.'

'Do not be savage,' said he, putting out his hand, 'even though she
should not come.'

Beatrice immediately saw that his manner with her was not playful, and
that his face was serious.  'I was only in joke,' said she; 'of course
I was only joking.  But is anything the matter?  Is Mary ill?'

'Oh, no; not ill at all; but she will not be here to-morrow, nor
probably for some time.  But, Miss Gresham, you must not be savage with
her.'

Beatrice tried to interrogate him, but he would not wait to answer her
questions.  While she was speaking he bowed to her in his usual
old-fashioned courteous way, and passed on out of hearing.  'She will
not come up for some time,' said Beatrice to herself.  'Then mamma must
have quarrelled with her.'  And at once in her heart she acquitted her
friend of all blame in the matter, whatever it might be, and condemned 
her mother unheard.

The doctor, when he arrived in his own house, had in nowise made up his
mind as to the manner in which he would break the matter to Mary; but
by the time that he had reached the drawing-room, he had made up his
mind to this, that he would put off the evil hour till the morrow.  He
would sleep on the matter--lie awake on it, more probably--and then at
breakfast, as best he could, tell her what had been said of her.

Mary that evening was more than usually inclined to be playful. She had
not been quite certain till the morning, whether Frank had absolutely
left Greshamsbury, and had, therefore, preferred the company of Miss
Oriel to going up to the house.  There was a peculiar cheerfulness
about her friend Patience, a feeling of satisfaction with the world and
those in it, which Mary always shared with her; and now she had brought
home to the doctor's fireside, in spite of her young troubles, a
smiling face, if not a heart altogether happy.

'Uncle,' she said at last, 'what makes you so sombre?  Shall I read to
you?'

'No; not to-night, dearest.'

'Why, uncle; what is the matter?'

'Nothing, nothing.'

'Ah, but it is something, and you shall tell me;' getting up, she came
over to his arm-chair, and leant over his shoulder.

He looked up at her for a minute in silence, and then, getting up from
his chair, passed his arm round her waist, and pressed her closely to
his heart.

'My darling!' he said, almost convulsively.  'My best own, truest
darling!' and Mary looked up into his face, saw that big tears were
running down his cheeks.

But still he told her nothing that night.



CHAPTER XV

COURCY

When Frank Gresham expressed to his father an opinion that Courcy
Castle was dull, the squire, as may be remembered, did not pretend to
differ from him.  To men such as the squire, and such as the squire's
son, Courcy Castle was dull.  To what class of men it would not be dull
the author is not prepared to say; but it may be presumed that the De
Courcys found it to their liking, or they would have made it other than
it was.

The castle itself was a huge brick pile, built in the days of William
III, which, though they were grand for days of the construction of the
Constitution, were not very grand for architecture of a more material
description.  It had, no doubt, a perfect right to be called a castle,
as it was entered by a castle-gate which led into a court the porter's 
lodge for which was built as it were into the wall; there were attached
to it also two round, stumpy adjuncts, which were, perhaps properly,
called towers, though they did not do much in the way of towering; and,
moreover, along one side of the house, over what would otherwise have
been the cornice, there ran a castellated parapet, through the
assistance of which, the imagination no doubt was intended to supply
the muzzles of defiant artillery. But any artillery which would have so
presented its muzzle must have been very small, and it may be doubted
whether even a bowman could have obtained shelter there.

The grounds about the castle were not very inviting, nor, as grounds,
very extensive; though, no doubt, the entire domain was such as suited
the importance of so puissant a nobleman as Earl de Courcy.  What,
indeed, should have been the park was divided out into various large
paddocks.  The surface was flat and unbroken; and though there were
magnificent elm-trees standing in straight lines, like hedgerows, the
timber had not that beautiful, wild, scattered look which generally 
gives the great charm to English scenery.

The town of Courcy--for the place claimed to rank as a town--was in many
particulars like the castle.  It was built of dingy-red brick--almost
more brown than red--and was solid, dull-looking, ugly and comfortable. 
It consisted of four streets, which were formed by two roads crossing
each other, making at the point of junction a centre for the town. Here
stood the Red Lion; had it been called the brown lion, the nomenclature
would have been more strictly correct; and here, in the old days of
coaching, some life had been wont to stir itself at those house in the
day and night when the Freetraders, Tallyhoes, and Royal Mails changed
their horses. But now there was a railway station a mile and a half 
distant, and the moving life of the town of Courcy was confined to the
Red Lion omnibus, which seemed to pass its entire time in going up and
down between the town and the station, quite unembarrassed by any great
weight of passengers.

There were, so said the Courcyites when away from Courcy, excellent
shops in the place; but they were not the less accustomed, when at home
among themselves, to complain to each other of the vile extortion with
which they were treated by their neighbours.  The ironmonger,
therefore, though he loudly asserted that he could beat Bristol in the
quality of his wares in one direction, and undersell Gloucester in 
another, bought his tea and sugar on the sly in one of those larger
towns; and the grocer, on the other hand equally distrusted the pots
and pans of home production.  Trade, therefore, at Courcy, had not
thriven since the railway opened: and, indeed, had any patient inquirer
stood at the cross through one entire day, counting customers who
entered the neighbouring shops, he might well have wondered that any 
shops in Courcy could be kept open.

And how changed has been the bustle of that once noisy inn to the
present death-like silence of its green courtyard!  There, a lame
ostler crawls about with the hands thrust into the capacious pockets of
his jacket, feeding on memory.  That weary pair of omnibus jades, and
three sorry posters are all that now grace those stables where horses
used to be stalled in close contiguity by the dozen; where twenty
grains apiece, abstracted from every feed of oats consumed during the
day, would have afforded a daily quart to the lucky pilferer.

Come, my friend, and discourse with me.  Let us know what are thy ideas
of the inestimable benefits which science has conferred on us in these,
our latter days.  How dost thou, among others, appreciate railways and
the power of steam, telegraphs, telegrams, and our new expresses?  But 
indifferently, you say.  'Time was I've zeed vifteen pair o' 'osses go
out of this 'ere yard in vour-and-twenty hour; and now there be'ant
vifteen, no, not ten, in vour-and-twenty days! There was the duik-not
this 'un; he be'ant no gude; but this 'un's vather-why, when he'd come
down the road, the cattle did be a-going, vour days an eend.  Here'd be
the tooter and the young gen'lmen, and the governess and the young
leddies, and then the servants-they'd be al'ays the grandest folk of
all--and then the duik and doochess--Lord love 'ee, zur; the money did
fly in them days!  But now--' and the feeling of scorn and contempt
which the lame ostler was enabled by his native talent to throw into
the word 'now', was quite as eloquent against the power of steam as
anything that has been spoken at dinners, or written in pamphlets by
the keenest admirers of latter-day lights.

'Why, luke at this 'ere town,' continued he of the sieve, 'the grass be
a-growing in the very streets;--that can't be no gude. Why, luke 'ee
here, zur; I do be a-standing at this 'ere gateway, just this way, hour
arter hour, and my heyes is hopen mostly;--I zees who's a-coming and
who's a-going.  Nobody's a-coming and nobody's a-going; that can't be
no gude.  Luke at that there homnibus; why, darn me--' and now, in his
eloquence at this peculiar point, my friend became more loud and
powerful than ever--'why, darn me, if maister harns enough with that
there bus to put hiron on them osses' feet, I'll-be-blowed!'  And as he
uttered this hypothetical denunciation on himself he spoke very slowly,
bringing out every word as it were separately, and lowering himself at
his knees at every sound, moving at the same time his right hand up and
down.  When he had finished, he fixed his eyes upon the ground,
pointing downwards, as if there was to be the site of his doom if the
curse that he had called down upon himself should ever come to pass;
and then, waiting no further converse, he hobbled away, melancholy, to
his deserted stables.

Oh, my friend! my poor lame friend! it will avail nothing to tell thee
of Liverpool and Manchester; of the glories of Glasgow, with her
flourishing banks; of London, with its third millions of inhabitants;
of the great things which commerce is doing for this nation of thine! 
What is commerce to thee, unless it be commerce in posting on that
worn-out, all but useless great western turnpike-road?  There is 
nothing left for thee but to be carted away as rubbish--for thee and for
many of us in these now prosperous days; oh, my melancholy, care-ridden
friend!

Courcy Castle was certainly a dull place to look at, and Frank, in his
former visits, had found that the appearance did not belie the
reality.  He had been but little there when the earl had been at
Courcy; and as he had always felt from his childhood a peculiar taste
to the governance of his aunt the countess, this perhaps may have added
to his feeling of dislike.  Now, however, the castle was to be fuller
than he had ever before known it; the earl was to be at home; there was
some talk of the Duke of Omnium coming for a day or two, though that
seemed doubtful; there was some faint doubt of Lord Porlock; Mr Moffat,
intent on the coming election--and also, let us hope, on his coming
bliss--was to be one of the guests; and there was also to be the great
Miss Dunstable.

Frank, however, found that those grandees were not expected quite
immediately.  'I might go back to Greshamsbury for three or four days
as she is not to be here,' he said naively to his aunt, expressing,
with tolerable perspicuity, his feeling, that he regarded his visit to
Courcy Castle quite as a matter of business.  But the countess would
hear of no such arrangement. Now that she had got him, she was not
going to let him fall back into the perils of Miss Thorne's intrigues, 
or even of Miss Thorne's propriety.  'It is quite essential,' she said,
'that you should be here a few days before her, so that she may see
that you are at home.' Frank did not understand the reasoning; but he
felt himself unable to rebel, and he therefore, remained there,
comforting himself, as best he might, with the eloquence of the
Honourable George, and the sporting humours of the Honourable John.

Mr Moffat was the earliest arrival of any importance.  Frank had not
hitherto made the acquaintance of his future brother-in-law, and there
was, therefore, some little interest in the first interview.  Mr Moffat
was shown into the drawing-room before the ladies had gone up to dress,
and it so happened that Frank was there also.  As no one else was in
the room but his sister and two of his cousins, he had expected to see 
the lovers rush into each other's arms.  But Mr Moffat restrained his
ardour, and Miss Gresham seemed contented that he should do so.

He was a nice, dapper man, rather above the middle height, and
good-looking enough had he had a little more expression in his face. He
had dark hair, very nicely brushed, small black whiskers, and a small
black moustache.  His boots were excellently well made, and his hands
were very white.  He simpered gently as he took hold of Augusta's
fingers, and expressed a hope that she had been quite will since last
he had the pleasure of seeing her.  Then he touched the hands of the
Lady Rosina and the Lady Margaretta.

'Mr Moffat, allow me to introduce you to my brother?'

'Most happy, I'm sure,' said Mr Moffat, again putting out his hand, and
allowing it to slip through Frank's grasp, as he spoke in a pretty,
mincing voice: 'Lady Arabella quite well?--and your father, and
sisters?  Very warm isn't it?--quite hot in town, I do assure you.'

'I hope Augusta likes him,' said Frank to himself, arguing on the
subject exactly as his father had done; 'but for an engaged lover he
seems to me to have a very queer way with him.' Frank, poor fellow! who
was of a coarser mould, would, under such circumstances, have been all
for kissing--sometimes, indeed, even under other circumstances.

Mr Moffat did not do much towards improving the conviviality of the
castle.  He was, of course, a good deal intent upon his coming
election, and spent much of his time with Mr Nearthewinde, the
celebrated parliamentary agent.  It behoved him to be a good deal at
Barchester, canvassing the electors and undermining, by Mr
Nearthewinde's aid, the mines for blowing him out of his seat, which
were daily being contrived by Mr Closerstil, on behalf of Sir Roger. 
The battle was to be fought on the internecine principle, no quarter
being given or taken on either side; and of course this gave Mr Moffat
as much as he knew how to do.

Mr Closerstil was well known to be the sharpest man at his business in
all England, unless the palm should be given to his great rival Mr
Nearthewinde; and in this instance he was to be assisted in the battle
by a very clever young barrister, Mr Romer, who was an admirer of Sir
Roger's career in life.  Some people in Barchester, when they saw Sir
Roger, Closerstil and Mr Romer saunter down the High Street, arm in 
arm, declared that it was all up with poor Moffat; but others, in whose
head the bump of veneration was strongly pronounced, whispered to each
other that great shibboleth--the name of the Duke of Omnium--and mildly
asserted it to be impossible that the duke's nominee should be thrown
out.

Our poor friend the squire did not take much interest in the matter
except in so far that he liked his son-in-law to be in Parliament. Both
the candidates were in his eye equally wrong in their opinions.  He had
long since recanted those errors of his early youth, which had cost him
his seat for the county, and had abjured the De Courcy politics.  He
was staunch enough as a Tory now that his being so would no longer be
of the slightest use to him; but the Duke of Omnium, and Lord de
Courcy, and Mr Moffat were all Whigs; Whigs, however, differing
altogether in politics from Sir Roger, who belonged to the Manchester
school, and whose pretensions, through some of those inscrutable twists
in modern politics which are quite unintelligible to the minds of
ordinary men outside the circle, were on this occasion secretly
favoured by the high Conservative party.

How Mr Moffat, who had been brought into the political world by Lord de
Courcy, obtained the weight of the duke's interest I never could
exactly learn.  For the duke and the earl did not generally act as
twin-brothers on such occasions.

There is a great difference in Whigs.  Lord de Courcy was a Court Whig,
following the fortunes, and enjoying, when he could get it, the
sunshine of the throne.  He was a sojourner at Windsor, and a visitor
at Balmoral.  He delighted in gold sticks, and was never so happy as
when holding some cap of maintenance or spur of precedence with due
dignity and acknowledged grace in the presence of all the Court.  His 
means had been somewhat embarrassed by early extravagance; and,
therefore, as it was to his taste to shine, it suited him to shine at
the cost of the Court rather than at his own.

The Duke of Omnium was a Whig of a very different calibre.  He rarely
went near the presence of majesty, and when he did so, he did it merely
as a disagreeable duty incident to his position.  He was very willing
that the Queen should be queen so long as he was allowed to be Duke of
Omnium.  Nor had he begrudged Prince Albert any of his honours till he
was called Prince Consort.  Then, indeed, he had, to his own intimate 
friends, made some remark in three words not flattering to the
discretion of the Prime Minister.  The Queen might be queen so long as
he was Duke of Omnium.  Their revenues were about the same, with the
exception, that the duke's were his own, and he could do what he liked
with them.  This remembrance did not unfrequently present itself to the
duke's mind.  In person, he was a plain, thin man, tall, but 
undistinguished in appearance, except that there was a gleam of pride
in his eye which seemed every moment to be saying, 'I am the Duke of
Omnium'.  He was unmarried, and, if report said true, a great
debauchee; but if so he had always kept his debaucheries decently away
from the eyes of the world, and was not, therefore, open to that loud
condemnation which should fall like a hailstorm round the ears of some
more open sinners.

Why these two mighty nobles put their heads together in order that the
tailor's son should represent Barchester in Parliament, I cannot
explain.  Mr Moffat, was, as has been said, Lord de Courcy's friend;
and it may be that Lord de Courcy was able to repay the duke for his
kindness, as touching Barchester, with some little assistance in the 
county representation.

The next arrival was that of the Bishop of Barchester.  A meek, good,
worthy man, much attached to his wife, and somewhat addicted to his
ease.  She, apparently, was made in a different mould, and by her
energy and diligence atoned for any want of those qualities which might
be observed in the bishop himself. When asked his opinion, his lordship
would generally reply by saying--'Mrs Proudie and I think so and so.' 
But before that opinion was given, Mrs Proudie would take up the tale,
and she, in her more concise manner, was not wont to quote the bishop
as having at all assisted in the consideration of the subject.  It was
well known in Barsetshire that no married pair consorted more closely
or more tenderly together; and the example of such conjugal affection
among persons in the upper classes is worth mentioning, as it is
believed by those below them, and too often with truth, that the sweet
bliss of connubial reciprocity is not so common as it should be among
the magnates of the earth.

But the arrival even of the bishop and his wife did not make the place
cheerful to Frank Gresham, and he began to long for Miss Dunstable, in
order that he might have something to do. He could not get on at all
with Mr Moffat.  He had expected that the man would at once have called
him Frank, and that he would have called the man Gustavus; but they did
not even get beyond Mr Moffat and Mr Gresham.  'Very hot in Barchester,
today, very,' was the nearest approach to conversation which Frank
could attain with him; and as far as he,