 Frank, could see, Augusta
never got much beyond it.  There might be tete-a-tete meetings between
them, but, if so, Frank could not detect when they took place; and so,
opening his heart at last to the Honourable George, for the want of
a better confidant, he expressed his opinion that his future 
brother-in-law was a muff.

'A muff--I believe you too.  What do you think now?  I have been with
him and Nearthewinde in Barchester these three days past, looking up
the electors' wives and daughters, and that kind of thing.'

'I say, if there is any fun in it you might as well take me with you.'

'Oh, there is not much fun; they are mostly so slobbered and dirty.  A
sharp fellow in Nearthewinde, and knows what he is about well.'

'Does he look up the wives and daughters too?'

'Oh, he goes on every tack just as it's wanted.  But there was Moffat,
yesterday, in a room behind the milliner's shop near Cuthbert's Gate; I
was with him.  The woman's husband is one of the choristers and an
elector, you know, and Moffat went to look for his vote.  Now, there
was no one there when we got there but the three young women, the wife,
that is, and her two girls--very pretty women they are too.'

'I say, George, I'll go and get the chorister's vote for Moffat; I
ought to do it as he's to be my brother-in-law.'

'But what do you think Moffat said to the women?'

'Can't guess--he didn't kiss them, did he?'

'Kiss any of them?  No; but he begged to give them his positive
assurance as a gentleman that if he was returned to Parliament he would
vote for an extension of the franchise, and the admission of the Jews
into the Parliament.'

'Well, he is a muff,' said Frank.



CHAPTER XVI

MISS DUNSTABLE

At last the great Miss Dunstable came.  Frank, when he heard that the
heiress had arrived, felt some slight palpitation at his heart.  He had
not the remotest idea in the world of marrying her; indeed, during the
last week past, absence had so heightened his love for Mary Thorne that
he was more than ever resolved that he would never marry any one but
her.  He knew that he had made her a formal offer for her hand, and 
that it behoved him to keep to it, let the charms of Miss Dunstable be
what they might; but, nevertheless, he was prepared to go through a
certain amount of courtship, in obedience to his aunt's behests, and he
felt a little nervous at being brought up in that way, face to face, to
do battle with two hundred thousand pounds.

'Miss Dunstable has arrived,' said his aunt to him, with great
complacency, on his return from an electioneering visit to the beauties
of Barchester which he made with his cousin George on the day after the
conversation which was repeated at the end of the last chapter.  'She
has arrived, and is looking remarkably well; she has quite a distingue
air, and will grace any circle to which she may be introduced.  I will 
introduce you before dinner, and you can take her out.'

'I couldn't propose to her tonight, I suppose?' said Frank, 
maliciously.

'Don't talk nonsense, Frank,' said the countess angrily.  'I am doing
what I can for you, and taking on an infinity of trouble to endeavour
to place you in an independent position; and now you talk nonsense to
me.'

Frank muttered some sort of apology, and then went to prepare himself
for the encounter.

Miss Dunstable, though she had come by train, had brought with her her
own carriage, her own horses, her own coachman and footman, and her own
maid, of course.  She had also brought with her half a score of trunks,
full of wearing apparel; some of them nearly as rich as that wonderful
box which was stolen a short time since from the top of a cab.  But she
brought these things, not in the least because she wanted them herself,
but because she had been instructed to do so.

Frank was a little more than ordinarily careful in dressing. He spoilt
a couple of white neckties before he was satisfied, and was rather
fastidious as the set of his hair. There was not much of the dandy
about him in the ordinary meaning of the word.  But he felt that it was
incumbent on him to look his best, seeing what it was expected he
should now do.  He certainly did not mean to marry Miss Dunstable; but
as he was to have a flirtation with her, it was well that he should do
so under the best possible auspices.

When he entered the drawing-room he perceived at once that the lady was
there.  She was seated between the countess and Mrs Proudie; and
mammon, in her person, was receiving worship from the temporalities and
spiritualities of the land.  He tried to look unconcerned, and remained
in the farther part of the room, talking with some of his cousins; but
he could not keep his eye off the future possible Mrs Frank Gresham; 
and it seemed as though she was as much constrained to scrutinize him
as he felt to scrutinize her.

Lady de Courcy had declared that she was looking extremely well, and
had particularly alluded to her distingue appearance. Frank at once
felt that he could not altogether go along with his aunt in this
opinion.  Miss Dunstable might be very well; but her style of beauty
was one which did not quite meet with his warmest admiration.

In age she was about thirty; but Frank, who was no great judge in these
matters, and who was accustomed to have very young girls round him, at
once put her down as being ten years older. She had a very high colour,
very red cheeks, a large mouth, big white teeth, a broad nose, and
bright, small, black eyes.  Her hair also was black and bright, but 
very crisp, and strong, and was combed close round her face in small
crisp black ringlets. Since she had been brought out into the
fashionable world some of her instructors in fashion had given her to
understand that curls were not the thing.  'They'll always pass
muster,' Miss Dunstable had replied, 'when they are done up with
bank-notes.'  It may therefore be presumed that Miss Dunstable had a
will of her own.

'Frank,' said the countess, in the most natural and unpremeditated way,
as soon as she caught her nephew's eye, 'come here.  I want to
introduce you to Miss Dunstable.'  The introduction was then made. 'Mrs
Proudie, would you excuse me? I must positively go and say a few words
to Mrs Barlow, or the poor woman will feel herself huffed'; and so
saying, she moved off, leaving the coast clear for Master Frank.

He of course slipped into his aunt's place, and expressed a hope that
Miss Dunstable was not fatigued by her journey.

'Fatigued!' said she, in a voice rather loud, but very good-humoured,
and not altogether unpleasing; 'I am not to be fatigued by such a thing
as that.  Why, in May we came through all the way from Rome to Paris
without sleeping--that is, without sleeping in a bed--and we were upset
three times out of the sledges coming over the Simpton.  It was such
fun! Why, I wasn't to say tired even then.'

'All the way from Rome to Paris!' said Mrs Proudie--in a tone of
astonishment, meant to flatter the heiress--'and what made you in such a
hurry?'

'Something about money matters,' said Miss Dunstable, speaking rather
louder than usual.  'Something to do with the ointment. I was selling
the business just then.'

Mrs Proudie bowed, and immediately changed the conversation. 'Idolatry
is, I believe, more rampant than ever in Rome,' said she; 'and I fear
there is no such thing at all as Sabbath observance.'

'Oh, not in the least,' said Miss Dunstable, with rather a joyous air;
'Sundays and week-days are all the same there.'

'How very frightful!' said Mrs Proudie.

'But it's a delicious place.  I do like Rome, I must say.  And as for
the Pope, if he wasn't quite so fat he would be the nicest old fellow
in the world.  Have you been in Rome, Mrs Proudie?'

Mrs Proudie sighed as she replied in the negative, and declared her
belief that danger was apprehended from such visits.

'Oh!--ah!--the malaria--of course--yes; if you go at the wrong time; but
nobody is such a fool as that now.'

'I was thinking of the soul, Miss Dunstable,' said the lady-bishop, in
her peculiar grave tone.  'A place where there are no Sabbath
observances--'

'And have you been at Rome, Mr Gresham?' said the young lady, turning
almost abruptly round to Frank, and giving a somewhat uncivilly cold
shoulder to Mrs Proudie's exhortation.  She, poor lady, was forced to
finish her speech to the Honourable George, who was standing near to
her.  He having an idea that bishops and all their belongings, like
other things appertaining to religion, should, if possible, be avoided;
but if that were not possible, should be treated with much assumed
gravity, immediately put on a long face, and remarked that--'it was a
deuced shame: for his part he always liked to see people go quiet on
Sundays.  The parsons had only one day out of seven, and he thought
they were fully entitled to that.'  Satisfied with which, or not
satisfied, Mrs Proudie had to remain silent till dinner-time.

'No,' said Frank; 'I never was in Rome.  I was in Paris once, that's
all.'  And then, feeling not unnatural anxiety as to the present state
of Miss Dunstable's worldly concerns, he took an opportunity of falling
back on that part of her conversation which Mrs Proudie had exercised
so much tact in avoiding.

'And was it sold?' said he.

'Sold! what sold?'

'You were saying about the business--that you came back without going to
bed because of selling the business.'

'Oh!--the ointment.  No; it was not sold.  After all, the affair did not
come off, and I might have remained and had another roll in the snow. 
Wasn't it a pity?'

'So,' said Frank to himself, 'if I should do it, I should be owner of
the ointment of Lebanon: how odd!'  And then he gave her his arm and
handed her down to dinner.

He certainly found that his dinner was less dull than any other he had
sat down to at Courcy Castle.  He did not fancy that he should ever
fall in love with Miss Dunstable; but she certainly was an agreeable
companion.  She told him of her tour, and the fun she had in her
journeys; how she took a physician with her for the benefit of her
health, whom she generally was forced to nurse; of the trouble it was
to her to look after and wait upon her numerous servants; of the tricks
she played to bamboozle people who came to stare at her; and, lastly,
she told him of a lover who followed her from country to country, and
was now in hot pursuit of her, having arrived in London the evening
before she left.

'A lover?' said Frank, somewhat startled by the suddenness of the
confidence.

'A lover--yes--Mr Gresham; why should I not have a lover?'

'Oh!--no--of course not.  I dare say you have had a good many.'

'Only three or four, upon my word; that is, only three or four that I
favour.  One is not bound to reckon the others, you know.'

'No, they'd be too numerous.  And so you have three whom you favour,
Miss Dunstable;' and Frank sighed, as though he intended to say that
the number was too many for his peace of mind.

'Is not that quite enough?  But of course I change them sometimes;' and
she smiled on him very good-naturedly.  'It would be very dull if I
were always to keep the same.'

'Very dull indeed,' said Frank, who did not quite know what to say.

'Do you think the countess would mind my having or two of them here if
I were to ask her?'

'I am quite sure she would,' said Frank, very briskly.  'She would not
approve of it; nor should I.'

'You--why, what have you to do with it?'

'A great deal--so much so that I positively forbid it; but, Miss
Dunstable--'

'Well, Mr Gresham?'

'We will contrive to make up for the deficiency as well as possible, if
you will permit us to do so.  Now for myself--'

'Well, for yourself?'

At this moment the countess gleamed her accomplished eye round the
table, and Miss Dunstable rose from her chair as Frank was preparing
his attack, and accompanied the other ladies into the drawing-room.

His aunt, as she passed him, touched his arm lightly with her fan, so
lightly that the action was perceived by no one else. But Frank well
understood the meaning of the touch, and appreciated the approbation
which it conveyed.  He merely blushed however at his own dissimulation;
for he felt more certain that ever that he would never marry Miss
Dunstable, and he felt nearly equally sure that Miss Dunstable would 
never marry him.

Lord de Courcy was now at home; but his presence did not add much
hilarity to the claret-cup.  The young men, however, were very keen
about the election, and Mr Nearthewinde, who was one of the party, was
full of the most sanguine hopes.

'I have done a good one at any rate,' said Frank; 'I have secured the
chorister's vote.'

'What!  Bagley?' said Neathewinde.  'The fellow kept out of my way, and
I couldn't see him.'

'I haven't exactly seen him,' said Frank; 'but I've got his vote all
the same.'

'What! by a letter?' said Mr Moffat.

'No, not by letter,' said Frank, speaking rather low as he looked at
the bishop and the earl; 'I got a promise from his wife: I think he's a
little in the henpecked line.'

'Ha--ha--ha!' laughed the good bishop, who, in spite of Frank's 
modulation of voice, had overheard what had passed.  'Is that the way
you manage electioneering matters in our cathedral city?'  The idea of
one of his choristers being in the henpecked line was very amusing to
the bishop.

'Oh, I got a distinct promise,' said Frank, in his pride; and then
added incautiously, 'but I had to order bonnets for the whole family.'

'Hush-h-h-h!' said Mr Nearthewinde, absolutely flabbergasted by such
imprudence on the part of one of his client's friends.  'I am quite
sure that you order had no effect, and was intended to have no effect
on Mr Bagley's vote.'

'Is that wrong?' said Frank; 'upon my word I thought it was quite
legitimate.'

'One should never admit anything in electioneering matters, should
one?' said George, turning to Mr Nearthewinde.

'Very little, Mr de Courcy; very little indeed--the less the better. 
It's hard to say in these days what is wrong and what is not.  Now,
there's Reddypalm, the publican, the man who has the Brown Bear.  Well,
I was there, of course: he's a voter, and if any man in Barchester
ought to feel himself bound to vote for a friend of the duke's he
ought.  Now, I was so thirsty when I was in that man's house, that I
was dying for a glass of beer; but for the life of me I didn't dare
order one.'

'Why not?' said Frank, whose mind was only just beginning to be
enlightened by the great doctrine of purity of election as practised in
English provincial towns.

'Oh, Closerstil had some fellow looking at me; why, I can't walk down
that town without having my very steps counted.  I like sharp fighting
myself, but I never go so sharp as that.'

'Nevertheless I got Bagley's vote,' said Frank, persisting in praise of
his own electioneering prowess; 'and you may be sure of this, Mr
Nearthewinde, none of Closerstil's men were looking at me when I got
it.'

'Who'll pay for the bonnets, Frank?' said George.

'Oh, I'll pay for them if Moffat won't.  I think I shall keep an
account there; they seem to have good gloves and those sort of things.'

'Very good, I have no doubt,' said George.

'I suppose your lordship will be in town soon after the meeting of
Parliament?' said the bishop, questioning the earl.

'Oh! yes; I suppose I must be there.  I am never allowed to remain very
long in the quiet.  It is a great nuisance; but it is too late to think
of that now.'

'Men in high places, my lord, never were, and never will be, allowed to
consider themselves.  They burn their torches not in their own behalf,'
said the bishop, thinking, perhaps, as much of himself as he did of his
noble friend.  'Rest and quiet are the comforts of those who have been
content to remain in obscurity.'

'Perhaps so,' said the earl, finishing his glass of claret with an air
of virtuous resignation.  'Perhaps so.'  His own martyrdom, however,
had not been severe, for the rest and quiet of home had never been
peculiarly satisfactory to his tastes. Soon after this they went to the
ladies.

It was some little time before Frank could find an opportunity of
recommencing his allotted task with Miss Dunstable.  She got into
conversation with the bishop and with some other people, and, except
that he took her teacup and nearly managed to squeeze one of her
fingers as she did so, he made very little further progress till
towards the close of the evening.

At last he found her so nearly alone as to admit of his speaking to her
in a low confidential voice.

'Have you managed that matter with my aunt?'

'What matter?' said Miss Dunstable; and her voice was not low, nor
particularly confidential.

'About those three or four gentlemen whom you wish to invite here?'

'Oh! my attendant knights! no, indeed; you gave me such very slight
hope of success; besides, you said something about my not wanting
them.'

'Yes I did; I really think they'd be quite unnecessary.  If you should
want any one to defend you--'

'At these coming elections, for instance.'

'Then, or at any other time, there are plenty here who will be ready to
stand up for you.'

'Plenty!  I don't want plenty: one good lance in the olden days was
always worth more than a score of ordinary men-at-arms.'

'But you talked about three or four.'

'Yes; but then you see, Mr Gresham, I have never yet found the one good
lance--at least, not good enough to suit my ideas of true prowess.'

What could Frank do but declare that he was ready to lay his own
in rest, now and always in her behalf?

His aunt had been quite angry with him, and had thought that he turned
her into ridicule, when he spoke of making an offer to her guest that
very evening; and yet here he was so placed that he had hardly an
alternative.  Let his inward resolution to abjure the heiress be ever
so strong, he was now in a position which allowed him no choice in the
matter.  Even Mary Thorne could hardly have blamed him for saying, that
so far as his own prowess went, it was quite at Miss Dunstable's 
service.  Had Mary been looking on, she perhaps, might have thought
that he could have done so with less of that look of devotion which he
threw into his eyes.

'Well, Mr Gresham, that's very civil--very civil indeed,' said Miss
Dunstable.  'Upon my word, if a lady wanted a true knight she might do
worse than trust to you.  Only I fear that your courage is of so
exalted a nature that you would be ever ready to do battle for any
beauty that might be in distress--or, indeed, who might not.  You could
never confine your valour to the protection of one maiden.'

'Oh, yes! but I would though if I liked her,' said Frank.  'There isn't
a more constant fellow in the world than I am in that way--you try me,
Miss Dunstable.'

'When young ladies make such trials as that, they sometimes find it too
late to go back if the trial doesn't succeed, Mr Gresham.'

'Oh, of course, there's always some risk.  It's like hunting; there
would be no fun if there was no danger.'

'But if you get a tumble one day you can retrieve your honour the next;
but a poor girl if she once trusts a man who says that he loves her,
has no such chance.  For myself, I would never listen to a man unless
I'd known him for seven years at least.'

'Seven years!' said Frank, who could not help thinking that in seven
years' time Miss Dunstable would be almost an old woman. 'Seven days is
enough to know any person.'

'Or perhaps seven hours; eh, Mr Gresham?'

'Seven hours--well, perhaps seven hours, if they happen to be a good
deal together during that time.'

'There's nothing after all like love at first sight, is there, Mr
Gresham?'

Frank knew well enough that she was quizzing him, and could not resist
the temptation he felt to be revenged on her.  'I am sure it's very
pleasant,' said he; 'but as for myself, I have never experienced it.'

'Ha, ha, ha!' laughed Miss Dunstable.  'Upon my word, Mr Gresham, I
like you amazingly.  I didn't expect to meet anybody down here that I
could like half so much.  You must come and see me in London, and I'll
introduce you to my three knights,' and so saying, she moved away and
fell into conversation with some of the higher powers.

Frank felt himself to be rather snubbed, in spite of the strong
expression which Miss Dunstable had made in his favour.  It was not
quite clear to him that she did not take him for a boy.  He was, to be
sure, avenged on her for that by taking her for a middle-aged woman;
but, nevertheless, he was hardly satisfied with himself; 'and she might
find afterwards that she was left in the lurch with all her money.' And
so he retired, solitary, into a far part of the room, and began to
think of Mary Thorne. As he did so, and as his eyes fell upon Miss
Dunstable's stiff curls, he almost shuddered.

And then the ladies retired.  His aunt, with a good-natured smile on
her face, come to him as she was leaving the room, the last of the
bevy, and putting her hand on his arm, led him out into a small
unoccupied chamber which opened from the grand saloon.

'Upon my word, Master Frank,' said she, 'you seem to be losing no time
with the heiress.  You have quite made an impression already.'

'I don't know much about that, aunt,' said he, looking rather sheepish.

'Oh, I declare you have; but, Frank, my dear boy, you should not
precipitate these sort of things too much.  It is well to take a little
more time: it is more valued; and perhaps, you know, on the whole--'

Perhaps Frank might know; but it was clear that Lady de Courcy did not:
at any rate, she did not know how to express herself. Had she said out
her mind plainly, she would probably have spoken thus: 'I want you to
make love to Miss Dunstable, certainly; or at any rate to make an offer
to her; but you need not make a show of yourself and of her, by doing 
it so openly as all that.' The countess, however, did not want to
reprimand her obedient nephew, and therefore did not speak out her
thoughts.

'Well?' said Frank, looking up into her face.

'Take a leetle more time--that is all, my dear boy; slow and sure, you
know,' so the countess again patted his arm and went away to bed.

'Old fool!' muttered Frank to himself, as he returned to the room where
the men were still standing.  He was right in this: she was an old
fool, or she would have seen that there was no chance whatever that her
nephew and Miss Dunstable should become man and wife.

'Well Frank,' said the Honourable John; 'so you're after the heiress
already.'

'He won't give any of us a chance,' said the Honourable George. 'If he
goes on in that way she'll be Mrs Gresham before a month is over.  But,
Frank, what will she say of your manner of looking for Barchester
votes?'

'Mr Gresham is certainly an excellent hand at canvassing,' said Mr
Nearthewinde; 'only a little too open in his manner of proceeding.'

'I got that chorister for you at any rate,' said Frank.  'And you would
never have had him without me.'

'I don't think half so much of the chorister's vote as that of Miss
Dunstable,' said the Honourable George: 'that's the interest that is
really worth looking after.'

'But, surely,' said Mr Moffat, 'Miss Dunstable has not property in
Barchester?'  Poor man! his heart was so intent on his election that he
had no a moment to devote to the claims of love.



CHAPTER XVII

THE ELECTION

And now the important day of the election had arrived, and some men's
hearts beat quickly enough.  To be or not to a member of the British
Parliament is a question of very considerable moment in a man's mind. 
Much is often said of the great penalties which the ambitious pay for
enjoying this honour; of the tremendous expenses of election; of the
long, tedious hours of unpaid labour: of the weary days passed in the
House; but, nevertheless, the prize is one very well worth the price
paid for it--well worth any price that can be paid for it short of
wading through dirt and dishonour.

No other great European nation has anything like it to offer to the
ambition of its citizens; for in no other great country of Europe, not
even in those which are free, has the popular constitution obtained, as
with us, true sovereignty and power of rule.  Here it is so; and when a
man lays himself out to be a member of Parliament, he plays the highest
game and for the highest stakes which the country affords.

To some men, born silver-spooned, a seat in Parliament comes as a
matter of course.  From the time of their early manhood they hardly
know what it is not to sit there; and the honour is hardly appreciated,
being too much a matter of course.  As a rule, they never know how
great a thing it is to be in Parliament; though, when reverse comes, as
reverses occasionally will come, they fully feel how dreadful it is to 
be left out.

But to men aspiring to be members, or to those who having been once
fortunate have again to fight the battle without assurance of success,
the coming election must be matter of dread concern.  Of, how
delightful to hear that the long-talked of rival has declined the
contest, and that the course is clear! or to find by a short canvass
that one's majority is safe, and the pleasures of crowing over an 
unlucky, friendless foe quite secured!

No such gratification as this filled the bosom of Mr Moffat on the
morning of the Barchester election.  To him had been brought no
positive assurance of success by his indefatigable agent, Mr
Nearthewinde.  It was admitted on all sides that the contest would be a
very close one; and Mr Nearthewinde would not do more than assert that
they ought to win unless things went wrong with them.

Mr Nearthewinde had other elections to attend to, and had not been
remaining at Courcy Castle ever since the coming of Miss Dunstable: but
he had been there, and at Barchester, as often as possible, and Mr
Moffat was made greatly uneasy by reflecting how very high the bill
would be.

The two parties had outdone each other in the loudness of their
assertions, that each would on his side conduct the election in strict
conformity to law.  There was to be no bribery.  Bribery! who indeed in
these days would dare to bribe; to give absolute money for an absolute
vote, and pay for such an article in downright palpable sovereigns? 
No.  Purity was much too rampant for that, and the means of detection
too well understood.  But purity was to be carried much further than
this.  There should be no treating; no hiring of two hundred votes to
act as messengers at twenty shillings a day in looking up some four
hundred other voters; no bands were to be paid for; no carriages
furnished; no ribbons supplied.  British voters were to vote, if vote
they would, for the love and respect they bore to their chosen 
candidate.  If so actuated, they would not vote, they might stay away;
no other inducement would be offered.

So much was said loudly--very loudly--by each party; but, nevertheless,
Mr Moffat, early in these election days, began to have some misgivings
about the bill.  The proclaimed arrangement had been one exactly
suitable to his taste; for Mr Moffat loved his money.  He was a man in
whose breast the ambition of being great in the world, and of joining
himself to aristocratic people was continually at war with the great 
cost which such tastes occasioned.  His last election had not been a
cheap triumph.  In one way or another money had been dragged from him
for purposes which had been to his mind unintelligible; and when, about
the middle of his first session, he had, with much grumbling, settled
all demands, he had questioned with himself whether his whistle was
worth its cost.

He was therefore a great stickler for purity of election; although, had
he considered the matter, he should have known that with him money was
his only passport into that Elysium in which he had now lived for two
years.  He probably did not consider it; for when, in those canvassing
days immediately preceding the election, he had seen that all the
beer-houses were open, and half the population was drunk, he had asked
Mr Nearthewinde whether this violation of the treaty was taking place
only on the part of the opponent, and whether, in such case, it would
not by duly noticed with a view to a possible petition.

Mr Nearthewinde assured him triumphantly that half at least of the
wallowing swine were his own especial friends; and that somewhat more
than half of the publicans of the town were eagerly engaged in fighting
his, Mr Moffat's battle.  Mr Moffat groaned, and would have
expostulated had Mr Nearthewinde been willing to hear him.  But that
gentleman's services had been put into requisition by Lord De Courcy 
rather than by the candidate.  For the candidate he cared but little. 
To pay the bill would be enough for him.  He, Mr Nearthewinde, was
doing his business as he well knew how to do it; and it was not likely
that he should submit to be lectured by such as Mr Moffat on a trumpery
score of expense.

It certainly did appear on the morning of the election as though some
great change had been made in that resolution of the candidates to be
very pure.  From and early hour rough bands of music were to be heard
in every part of the usually quiet town; carts and gigs, omnibuses and
flys, all the old carriages from all the inn-yards, and every vehicle
of any description which could be pressed into the service were in 
motion; if the horses and post-boys were not to be paid for by the
candidates, the voters themselves were certainly very liberal in their
mode of bringing themselves to the poll.  The election district of the
city of Barchester extended for some miles on each side of the city, so
that the omnibuses and flys had enough to do.  Beer was to be had at
the public-houses, almost without question, by all who chose to ask
for it; and rum and brandy were dispensed to select circles within the
bars with equal profusion.  As for ribbons, the mercers' shops must
have been emptied of that article, as far as scarlet and yellow were
concerned.  Scarlet was Sir Roger's colour, while the friends of Mr
Moffat were decked with yellow.  Seeing what he did see, Mr Moffat
might well ask whether there had not been a violation of the treaty of 
purity!

At the time of this election there was some question whether England
should go to war with all her energy; or whether it would not be better
for her to save her breath to cool her porridge, and not meddle more
than could be helped with foreign quarrels.  The last view of the
matter was advocated by Sir Roger, and his motto of course proclaimed
the merits of domestic peace and quiet.  'Peace abroad and a big loaf at
home', was consequently displayed on four or five huge scarlet banners,
and carried waving over the heads of the people.  But Mr Moffat was a
staunch supporter of the Government, who were already inclined to be
belligerent, and 'England's honour' was therefore the legend under
which he selected to do battle.  It may, however, be doubted whether 
there was in all Barchester one inhabitant--let alone one elector--so
fatuous to suppose that England's honour was in any special manner dear
to Mr Moffat; or that he would be whit more sure of a big loaf than he
was now, should Sir Roger happily become a member of the legislature.

And then the fine arts were resorted to, seeing that language fell
short in telling all that was found necessary to be told. Poor Sir
Roger's failing as regards the bottle were too well known; and it was
also known that, in acquiring this title, he had not quite laid aside
the rough mode of speech which he had used in his early years.  There
was, consequently, a great daub painted up on sundry walls, on which a
navvy, with a pimply, bloated face, was to be seen standing on a
railway bank, leaning on a spade holding a bottle in one hand, while he
invited a comrade to drink.  'Come, Jack, shall us have a drop of
some'at short?' were the words coming out of the navvy's mouth; and
under this was painted in huge letters,

THE LAST NEW BARONET

But Mr Moffat hardly escaped on easier terms.  The trade by which his
father had made his money was as well known as that of the railway
contractor; and every possible symbol of tailordom was displayed in
graphic portraiture on the walls and hoardings of the city.  He was
drawn with his goose, his scissors, with his needle, with his tapes; he
might be seen measuring, cutting, pressing, carrying home his bundle
and presenting his little bill; and under each of these representations
was repeated his own motto: 'England's honour'.

Such were the pleasant little amenities with which the people of
Barchester greeted the two candidates who were desirous of the honour
of serving them in Parliament.

The polling went briskly and merrily.  There were somewhat above nine
hundred registered voters, of whom the greater portion recorded their
votes early in the day.  At two o'clock, according to Sir Roger's
committee, the numbers were as follows:--

    Scatcherd       275
    Moffat          268

Whereas, by the light afforded by Mr Moffat's people, they stood in a
slightly different ratio to each other, being written thus:--

    Moffat          277
    Scatcherd       269

This naturally heightened the excitement, and gave additional delight
to the proceedings.  At half-past two it was agreed by both sides that
Mr Moffat was ahead; the Moffatites claiming a majority of twelve, and
the Scatcherdites allowing a majority of one.  But by three o'clock
sundry good men and true, belonging to the railway interest, had made
their way to the booth in spite of the efforts of a band of roughs from
Courcy, and Sir Roger was again leading, by ten or a dozen, according
to his own showing.

One little transaction which took place in the earlier part of the day
deserves to be recorded.  There was in Barchester an honest
publican--honest as the world of publicans goes--who not only was
possessed of a vote, but possessed of a son who was a voter.  He was
one Reddypalm in earlier days, before he had learned to appreciate the
full value of an Englishman's franchise, he had been a declared Liberal
and a friend of Roger Scatcherd's.  In latter days he had governed his 
political feelings with more decorum, and had not allowed himself to be
carried away by such foolish fervour as he had evinced in his youth. On
this special occasion, however, his line of conduct was so mysterious
as for a while to baffle even those who knew him best.

His house was apparently open in Sir Roger's interest.  Beer, at any
rate, was flowing there as elsewhere; and scarlet ribbons going in--not
perhaps, in a state of perfect steadiness--came out more unsteady than
before.  Still had Mr Reddypalm been deaf to the voice of that charmer,
Closerstil, though he had charmed with all his wisdom.  Mr Reddypalm
had stated, first his unwillingness to vote at all:--he had, he said,
given over politics, and was not inclined to trouble his mind again
with the subject; then he had spoken of his great devotion to the Duke
of Omnium, under whose grandfathers his grandfather had been bred: Mr
Nearthewinde had, as he said, been with him, and proved to him beyond a
shadow of a doubt that it would show the deepest ingratitude on his
part to vote against the duke's candidate.

Mr Closerstil thought he understood all this, and sent more, and still
more men to drink beer.  He even caused--taking infinite trouble to
secure secrecy in the matter--three gallons of British brandy to be
ordered and paid for as the best French.  But, nevertheless, Mr
Reddypalm made no sign to show that he considered that the right thing
had been done.  On the evening before the election, he told one of Mr 
Closerstil's confidential men, that he had thought a good deal about
it, and that he believed he should be constrained by his conscience to
vote for Mr Moffat.

We have said that Mr Closerstil was accompanied by a learned friend of
his, one Mr Romer, a barrister, who was greatly interested in Sir
Roger, and who, being a strong Liberal, was assisting in the canvass
with much energy.  He, hearing how matters were likely to go with this
conscientious publican, and feeling himself peculiarly capable of
dealing with such delicate scruples, undertook to look into the case in
hand.  Early, therefore, on the morning of the election, he sauntered
down the cross street in which hung out the sign of the Brown Bear,
and, as he expected, found Mr Reddypalm near his own door.

Now it was quite an understood thing that there was to be no bribery. 
This was understood by no one better than Mr Romer, who had, in truth,
drawn up many of the published assurances to that effect.  And, to give
him his due, he was fully minded to act in accordance with these
assurances.  The object of all the parties was to make it worth the
voters' while to give their votes; but to do so without bribery.  Mr 
Romer had repeatedly declared that he would have nothing to do with any
illegal practising; but he had also declared that, as long as all was
done according to law, he was ready to lend his best efforts to assist
Sir Roger.  How he assisted Sir Roger, and adhered to the law, will now
be seen.

Oh, Mr Romer!  Mr Romer! is it not the case with thee that thou
'wouldst not play false, and yet wouldst wrongly win?'  Not in
electioneering, Mr Romer, any more than in any other pursuits, can a
man touch pitch and not be defiled; as thou, innocent as thou art, wilt
soon learn to thy terrible cost.

'Well, Reddypalm,' said Mr Romer, shaking hands with him.  Mr Romer had
not been equally cautious as Neatherwinde, and had already drunk sundry
glasses of ale at the Brown Bear, in the hope of softening the stern
Bear-warden.  'How is it to-day? Which is to be the man?'

'If any one knows that, Mr Romer, you must be the man.  A poor
numbskull like me knows nothing of them matters.  How should I? All I
looks to, Mr Romer, is selling a trifle of drink now and then--selling
it, and getting paid for it, you know, Mr Romer.'

'Yes, that's important, no doubt.  But come, Reddypalm, such an old
friend as Sir Roger as you are, a man he speaks of as one of his
intimate friends, I wonder how you can hesitate about it?  Now with
another man, I should think that he wanted to be paid for voting--'

'Oh, Mr Romer!  fie--fie--fie!'

'I know it's not the case with you.  It would be an insult to offer you
money, even if money were going.  I should not mention this, only as
money is not going, neither, on our side nor on the other, no harm can
be done.'

'Mr Romer, if you speak of such a thing, you'll hurt me.  I know the
value of an Englishman's franchise too well to wish to sell it.  I
would not demean myself so low; no, not though five-and-twenty pound a
vote was going, as there was in the good old times--and that's not so
long either.'

'I am sure you wouldn't, Reddypalm; I'm sure you wouldn't.  But an
honest man like you should stick to old friends.  Now, tell me,' and
putting his arm through Reddypalm's, he walked with him into the
passage of his own house; 'Now, tell me--is there anything wrong?  It's
between friends, you know.  Is there anything wrong?'

'I wouldn't sell my vote for untold gold,' said Reddypalm, who was
perhaps aware that untold gold would hardly be offered to him for it.

'I am sure you would not,' said Mr Romer.

'But,' said Reddypalm, 'a man likes to be paid his little bill.'

'Surely, surely,' said the barrister.

'And I did say two years since, when your friend Mr Closerstil brought
a friend of his down to stand here--it wasn't Sir Roger then--but when
he brought a friend of his down, and when I drew two or three hogsheads
of ale on their side, and when my bill was questioned, and only
half-settled, I did say that I wouldn't interfere with no election no
more. And no more I will, Mr Romer--unless it be to give a quiet vote
for the nobleman under whom I and mine always lived respectable.'

'Oh!' said Mr Romer.

'A man do like to have his bill paid, you know, Mr Romer.'

Mr Romer could not but acknowledge that this was a natural feeling on
the part of an ordinary mortal publican.

'It goes agin the grain with a man not to have his little bill paid,
and specially at election time,' again urged Mr Reddypalm.

Mr Romer had not much time to think about it; but he knew well that
matters were so nearly balanced, that the votes of Mr Reddypalm and his
son were of inestimable value.

'If it's only about your bill,' said Mr Romer, 'I'll see to have it
settled.  I'll speak to Closerstil about that.'

'All right!' said Reddypalm, seizing the young barrister's hand, and
shaking it warmly; 'all right!'  And late in the afternoon when a vote
or two became matter of intense interest, Mr Reddypalm and his son came
up to the hustings and boldly tendered theirs for their old friend Sir
Roger.

There was a great deal of eloquence heard in Barchester on that day. 
Sir Roger had by this time so far recovered as to be able to go through
the dreadfully hard work of canvassing and addressing the electors from
eight in the morning till near sunset.  A very perfect recovery, most
men will say.  Yes; a perfect recovery as regarded the temporary use of
his faculties, both physical and mental; though it may be doubted 
whether there can be any permanent recovery from such a disease as
his.  What amount of brandy he consumed to enable him to perform this
election work, and what lurking evil effect the excitement have on
him--of these matters no record was kept in the history of those
proceedings.

Sir Roger's eloquence was of a rough kind; but not perhaps the less
operative on those for whom it was intended.  The aristocracy of
Barchester consisted chiefly of clerical dignitaries, bishops, deans,
prebendaries, and such like: on them and theirs it was not probable
that anything said by Sir Roger would have much effect.  Those men
would either abstain from voting, or vote for the railway hero, with
the view of keeping out the De Courcy candidate.  Then came the 
shopkeepers, who might also be regarded as a stiff-necked generation,
impervious to electioneering eloquence.  They would, generally, support
Mr Moffat.  But there was an inferior class of voters, ten-pound
freeholders, and such like, who, at this period, were somewhat given to
have an opinion of their own, and over them it was supposed that Sir 
Roger did obtain some power by his gift of talking.

'Now, gentlemen, will you tell me this,' said he, bawling at the top of
his voice from the portico which graced the door of the Dragon of
Wantley, at which celebrated inn Sir Roger's committee sat:--'Who is Mr
Moffat, and what has he done for us? There have been some
picture-makers about the town this week past.  The Lord knows who they
are; I don't.  These clever fellows do tell you who I am, and what I've
done.  I ain't very proud of the way they've painted me, though there's
something about it I ain't ashamed of either.  See here,' and he held
up on one side of him one of the great daubs oh himself--'just hold it
there till I can explain it,' and, he handed the paper to one of his
friends.  'That's me,' said Sir Roger, putting up his stick, and
pointing to the pimply-nosed representation of himself.

'Hurrah!  Hur-r-rah!  more power to you--we all know who you are,
Roger.  You're the boy!  When did you get drunk last?'  Such-like
greetings, together with a dead cat which was flung at him from the
crowd, and which he dexterously parried with his stick, were the
answers which he received to this exordium.

'Yes,' said he, quite undismayed by this little missile which had so
nearly reached him: 'that's me.  And look here; this brown,
dirty-looking broad streak here is intended for a railway; and that
thing in my hand--not the right hand; I'll come to that presently--'

'How about the brandy, Roger?'

'I'll come to that presently.  I'll tell you about the brandy in good
time.  But that thing in my left hand is a spade.  Now, I never handled
a spade, and never could; but, boys, I handled a chisel and mallet; and
many a hundred block of stone has come out smooth from under that
hand;' and Sir Roger lifted up his great broad palm wide open.

'So you did, Roger, and well we minds it.'

'The meaning, however, of that spade is to show that I made the
railway.  Now I'm very much obliged to those gentlemen over at the
White Horse for putting up this picture of me.  It's a true picture,
and it tells you who I am.  I did make that railway. I have made
thousands of miles of railway; I am making thousands of miles
railways--some in Europe, some in Asia, some in America.  It's a true
picture,' and he poked his stick right through it and held it up to the
crowd.  'A true picture: but for that spade and that railway, I 
shouldn't be now here asking your votes; and, when next February comes,
I shouldn't be sitting in Westminster to represent you, as by God's
grace, I certainly will do.  That tells you who I am.  But now, will
you tell me who Mr Moffat is?'

'How about the brandy, Roger?'

'Oh, yes, the brandy!  I was forgetting that and the little speech that
is coming out of my mouth--a deal shorter speech, and a better one than
what I am making now.  Here, in the right hand you see a brandy bottle. 
Well, boys, I am not ashamed of that; as long as a man does his
work--and the spade shows that--it's only fair he should have something
to comfort him.  I'm always able to work, and few men work much harder.
I'm always able to work, and no man has a right to expect more of me. I
never expect more than that from those who word with me.'

'No more you don't, Roger: a little drop's very good, ain't it, Roger? 
Keeps the cold from the stomach, eh, Roger?'

'Then as to this speech, "Come, Jack, let's have a drop of some'at
short".  Why, that's a good speech too.  When I do drink I like to
share with a friend; and I don't care how humble that friend is.'

'Hurrah!  more power.  That's true too, Roger; may you never be without
a drop to wet your whistle.'

'They say I'm the last new baronet.  Well, I ain't ashamed of that; not
a bit.  When will Mr Moffat get himself made a baronet?  No man can
truly say I'm too proud of it.  I have never stuck myself up; no, nor
stuck my wife up either: but I don't see much to be ashamed of because
the bigwigs chose to make a baronet of me.'

'Nor, no more thee h'ant, Roger.  We'd all be barrownites if so be we
knew the way.'

'But now, having polished off this bit of picture, let me ask you who
Mr Moffat is?  There are pictures enough about him, too; though Heaven
knows where they all come from.  I think Sir Edwin Landseer must have
done this one of the goose; it is so deadly natural.  Look at it; there
he is.  Upon my word, whoever did that ought to make his fortune at
some of these exhibitions.  Here he is again, with a big pair of 
scissors.  He calls himself "England's honour"; what the deuce
England's honour has to do with tailoring, I can't tell you: perhaps Mr
Moffat can.  But mind you, my friends, I don't say anything against
tailoring: some of you are tailors, I dare say.'

'Yes, we be,' said a little squeaking voice from out of the crowd.

'And a good trade it is.  When I first know Barchester there were
tailors here could lick any stone-mason in the trade; I say nothing
against tailors.  But it isn't enough for a man to be a tailor unless
he's something else along with it.  You're not so fond of tailors that
you'll send one up to Parliament merely because he is a tailor.'

'We won't have no tailors.  No; nor yet no cabbaging.  Take a go of
brandy, Roger; you're blown.'

'No, I'm not blown yet.  I've a deal more to say about Mr Moffat before
I shall be blown.  What has he done to entitle him to come here before
you and ask you to send him to Parliament?  Why; he isn't even a
tailor.  I wish he were.  There's always some good in a fellow who
knows how to earn his own bread.  But he isn't a tailor; he can't even
put a stitch in towards mending England's honour.  His father was a 
tailor; not a Barchester tailor, mind you, so as to give him any claim
on your affections; but a London tailor.  Now the question is, do you
want to send the son of a London tailor up to Parliament to represent
you?'

'No, we don't; nor yet we won't either.'

'I rather think not.  You've had him once, and what has he done for
you?  has he said much for you in the House of Commons?  Why, he's so
dumb a dog that he can't bark even for a bone.  I'm told it's quite
painful to hear him fumbling and mumbling and trying to get up a speech
there over at the White Horse.  He doesn't belong to the city; he
hasn't done anything for the city; and he hasn't the power to do
anything for the city.  Then, why on earth does he come here?  I'll 
tell you.  The Earl de Courcy brings him.  He's going to marry the Earl
de Courcy's niece; for they say he's very rich--this tailor's son--only
they do say also that he doesn't much like to spend his money.  He's
going to marry Lord de Courcy's niece, and Lord de Courcy wishes that
his nephew should be in Parliament.  There, that's the claim which Mr 
Moffat has here on the people of Barchester. He's Lord de Courcy's
nominee, and those who feel themselves bound hand and foot, heart and
soul, to Lord de Courcy, had better vote for him.  Such men have my
leave.  If there are enough of such at Barchester to send him to
Parliament, the city in which I was born must be very much altered
since I was a young man.'

And so finishing his speech, Sir Roger retired within, and recruited 
himself in the usual manner.

Such was the flood of eloquence at the Dragon of Wantly.  At the White
Horse, meanwhile, the friends of the De Courcy interest were treated
perhaps to sounder political views; though not expressed in periods so
intelligibly fluent as those of Sir Roger.

Mr Moffat was a young man, and there was no knowing to what proficiency
in the Parliamentary gift of public talking he might yet attain; but
hitherto his proficiency was not great. He had, however, endeavoured to
make up by study for any want of readiness of speech, and had come to
Barchester daily, for the last four days, fortified with a very pretty
harangue, which he had prepared for himself in the solitude of his 
chamber.  On the three previous days matters had been allowed to
progress with tolerable smoothness, and he had been permitted to
deliver himself of his elaborate eloquence with few other interruptions
than those occasioned by his own want of practice.  But on this, the
day of days, the Barchesterian roughs were not so complaisant.  It
appeared to Mr Moffat, when he essayed to speak, that he was surrounded
by enemies rather than friends; and in his heart he gave great blame to
Mr Nearthewinde for not managing matters better for him.

'Men of Barchester,' he began, in a voice which was every now and then
preternaturally loud, but which, at each fourth or fifth word, gave way
from want of power, and descended to its natural weak tone.  'Men of
Barchester--electors and non-electors--'

'We is hall electors; hall on us, my young kiddy.'

'Electors and non-electors, I now ask your suffrages, not for the first
time--'

'Oh! we've tried you.  We know what you're made on.  Go on, Snip; don't
you let 'em put you down.'

'I've had the honour of representing you in Parliament for the last two
years and--'

'And a deuced deal you did for us, didn't you?'

'What could you expect from the ninth part of a man?  Never mind,
Snip--go on; don't you be out by any of them.  Stick to your wax and
thread like a man--like the ninth part of a man--go on a little faster,
Snip.'

'For the last two years--and--and--' Here Mr Moffat looked round to his
friends for some little support, and the Honourable George, who stood
close behind him, suggested that he had gone through it like a brick.

'And--and I went through it like a brick,' said Mr Moffat, with the
gravest possible face, taking up in his utter confusion the words that
were put into his mouth.

'Hurray!--so you did--you're the real brick.  Well done, Snip; go it
again with the wax and thread!'

'I am a thorough-paced reformer,' continued Mr Moffat, somewhat
reassured by the effect of the opportune words which his friend had
whispered into his ear.  'A thorough-paced reformer--a thorough-paced
reformer--'

'Go on, Snip.  We all know what that means.'

'A thorough-paced reformer--'

'Never mind your paces, man; but get on.  Tell us something new.  We're
all re