formers, we are.'

Poor Mr Moffat was a little thrown back.  It wasn't so easy to tell
these gentlemen anything new, harnessed as he was at this moment; so he
looked back at his honourable supporter for some further hint.  'Say
something about their daughters,' whispered George, whose own flights
of oratory were always on that subject.  Had he counselled Mr Moffat to
way a word or two about the tides, his advice would not have been less
to the purpose.

'Gentlemen,' he began again--'you all know that I am a thorough-paced
reformer--'

'Oh, drat your reform.  He's a dumb dog.  Go back to your goose,
Snippy; you never were made for this work.  Go to Courcy Castle and
reform that.'

Mr Moffat, grieved in his soul, was becoming inextricably bewildered by
such facetiae as these, when an egg--and it may be feared not a fresh
egg--flung with unerring precision, struck him on the open part of his
well-plaited shirt, and reduced him to speechless despair.

An egg is a means of delightful support when properly administered; but
it is not calculated to add much spirit to a man's eloquence, or to
ensure his powers of endurance, when supplied in the manner above
described.  Men there are, doubtless, whose tongues would not be
stopped even by such an argument as this; but Mr Moffat was not one of
them.  As the insidious fluid trickled down beneath his waistcoat, he
felt that all further powers of coaxing the electors out of their 
votes, by words flowing from his tongue sweeter than honey, was for
that occasion denied him.  He could not be self-confident, energetic,
witty, and good-humoured with a rotten egg, drying through his
clothes.  He was forced, therefore, to give way, and with sadly
disconcerted air retired from the open window at which he had been
standing.

It was in vain that the Honourable George, Mr Nearthewinde, and Frank
endeavoured again to bring him to the charge.  He was like a beaten
prize-fighter, whose pluck has been cowed out of him, and who, if he
stands up, only stands up to fall. Mr Moffat got sulky also, and when
he was pressed, said that Barchester and the people in it might be d---. 
'With all my heart,' said Mr Nearthewinde.  'That wouldn't have any
effect on their votes.'

But, in truth, it mattered very little whether Mr Moffat spoke, or
whether he didn't speak. Four o'clock was the hour for closing the poll,
and that was now fast coming. Tremendous exertions had been made about
half-past three, by a safe emissary sent from Nearthewinde, to prove to
Mr Reddypalm that all manner of contingent advantages would accrue to
the Brown Bear if it should turn out that Mr Moffat should take his seat
for Barchester. No bribe was, of course offered or even hinted at. The
purity of Barchester was not contaminated during the day by one such
curse as this. But a man, and a publican, would be required to do some
great deed in the public line. To open some colossal tapp to draw beer
for the million; and no one would be so fit as Mr Reddypalm--if only it
might turn out that Mr Moffat should, in the coming February, take his
seat as member for Barchester.

But Mr Reddypalm was a man of humble desires, whose ambitions scored no
higher than this--that his little bills should be duly settled.  It was
wonderful what love an innkeeper has for his bill in its entirety.  An
account, with a respectable total of five or six pounds, is brought to
you, and you complain but of one article; that fire in the bedroom was 
never lighted; or that second glass of brandy and water was never
called for.  You desire to have the shilling expunged, and all your
host's pleasure in the whole transaction is destroyed.  Oh!  my
friends, pay for the brandy and water, though you never drank it;
suffer the fire to pass, though it never warmed you.  Why make a good
man miserable for such a trifle?

It became notified to Reddypalm with sufficient clearness that his bill
for the past election should be paid without further question; and
therefore, at five o'clock the Mayor of Barchester proclaimed the
results of the contests in the following figures:--

    Scatcherd       378
    Moffat          376

Mr Reddypalm's two votes had decided the question.  Mr Nearthewinde
immediately went up to town; and the dinner party at Courcy Castle that
evening was not a particularly pleasant meal.

This much, however, had been absolutely decided before the yellow
committee concluded their labour at the White Horse: there should be a
petition.  Mr Nearthewinde had not been asleep, and already knew
something of the manner in which Mr Reddypalm's mind had been quieted.



CHAPTER XVIII

THE RIVALS

The intimacy between Frank and Miss Dunstable grew and prospered.  That
is to say, it prospered as an intimacy, though perhaps hardly as a love
affair.  There was a continued succession of jokes between them, which
no one else in the castle understood; but the very fact of there being 
such a good understanding between them rather stood in the way of, than
assisted, that consummation which the countess desired.  People, when
they are in love with each other, or even when they pretend to be, do
not generally show it by loud laughter. Nor is it frequently the case
that a wife with two hundred thousand pounds can be won without some
little preliminary despair.

Lady de Courcy, who thoroughly understood that portion of the world in
which she herself lived, saw that things were not going quite as they
should do, and gave much and repeated advice to Frank on the subject. 
She was the more eager in doing this, because she imagined Frank had
done what he could to obey her first precepts.  He had not turned up
his nose at Miss Dunstable's curls, nor found fault with her loud
voice: he had not objected to her as ugly, nor even shown any dislike
to her age.  A young man who had been so amenable to reason was worthy
of further assistance; and so Lady de Courcy did what she could to
assist him.

'Frank, my dear boy,' she would say, 'you are a little too noisy, I
think.  I don't mean for myself, you know; I don't mind it.  But Miss
Dunstable would like it better if you were a little more quiet with
her.'

'Would she, aunt?' said Frank, looking demurely up into the countess's
face.  'I rather think she likes fun and noise, and that sort of
thing.  You know she's not very quiet herself.'

'Ah!--but, Frank, there are times, you know, when that sort of thing
should be laid aside.  Fun, as you call it, is all very well in its
place.  Indeed, no one likes it better than I do. But that's not the
way to show admiration.  Young ladies like to be admired; and if you'll
be a little more soft-mannered with Miss Dunstable, I'm sure you'll
find it will answer better.'

And so the old bird taught the young bird how to fly--very 
needlessly--for in this matter of flying, Nature gives her own lessons
thoroughly; and the ducklings will take the water, even though the
maternal hen warn them against the perfidious element never so loudly.

Soon after this, Lady de Courcy began to be not very well pleased in
the matter.  She took it into her head that Miss Dunstable was
sometimes almost inclined to laugh at her; and on one or two occasions
it almost seemed as though Frank was joining Miss Dunstable in doing
so.  The fact indeed was, that Miss Dunstable was fond of fun; and,
endowed as she was with all the privileges which two hundred thousand
pounds may be supposed to give to a young lady, did not very much care 
at whom she laughed.  She was able to make a tolerably correct guess at
Lady De Courcy's plan towards herself; but she did not for a moment
think that Frank had any intention of furthering his aunt's views.  She
was, therefore, not at all ill-inclined to have her revenge on the
countess.

'How very fond your aunt is of you!' she said to him one wet morning,
as he was sauntering through the house; now laughing, and almost
romping with her--then teasing his sister about Mr Moffat--and then
bothering his lady-cousins out of all their propriety.

'Oh, very!' said Frank: 'she is a dear, good woman, is my Aunt De
Courcy.'

'I declare she takes more notice of you and your doings than of any of
your cousins.  I wonder they aren't jealous.'

'Oh!  they're such good people.  Bless me, they'd never be jealous.'

'You are so much younger than they are, that I suppose she thinks you
want more of her care.'

'Yes; that's it.  You see she is fond of having a baby to nurse.'

'Tell me, Mr Gresham, what was it she was saying to you last night?  I
know we have been misbehaving ourselves dreadfully. It was all your
fault; you would make me laugh so.'

'That's just what I said to her.'

'She was talking about it, then?'

'How on earth should she talk of any one else as long as you are here? 
Don't you know that all the world is talking about you?'

'Is it?--dear me, how kind!  But I don't care a straw about any world at
present but Lady de Courcy's world.  What did she say?'

'She said you were very beautiful--'

'Did she?--how good of her!'

'No; I forgot.  It--it was I that said that; and she said--what was it
she said?  She said, that after all, beauty was but skin deep--and that
she valued you for your virtues and prudence rather than your good
looks.'

'Virtues and prudence!  She said I was prudent and virtuous?'

'Yes.'

'And you talked of my beauty?  That was so kind of you.  You didn't
either of you say anything about other matters?'

'What other matters?'

'Oh!   I don't know.  Only some people are sometimes valued rather for
what they've got than for any good qualities belonging to themselves
intrinsically.'

'That can never be the case with Miss Dunstable; especially not at
Courcy Castle,' said Frank, bowing easily from the corner of the sofa
over which he was leaning.

'Of course not,' said Miss Dunstable; and Frank at once perceived that
she spoke in a tone of voice differing much from that half-bantering,
half-good-humoured manner that was customary with her.  'Of course not:
any such idea would be quite out of the question with Lady de Courcy.' 
She paused for a moment, and then added in a tone different again, and 
unlike any that he had yet heard from her:--'It is, at any rate, out of
the question with Mr Frank Gresham--of that I am quite sure.'

Frank ought to have understood her, and have appreciated the good
opinion which she intended to convey; but he did not entirely do so. He
was hardly honest himself towards her; and he could not at first
perceive that she intended to say that she thought him so.  He knew
very well that she was alluding to her own huge fortune, and was
alluding also to the fact that people of fashion sought her because of
it; but he did not know that she intended to express a true acquittal 
as regarded him of any such baseness.

And did he deserve to be acquitted?  Yes, upon the whole he did;--to be
acquitted of that special sin.  His desire to make Miss Dunstable
temporarily subject to his sway arose, not from a hankering after her
fortune, but from an ambition to get the better of a contest in which
other men around him seemed to be failing.

For it must not be imagined that, with such a prize to be struggled
for, all others stood aloof and allowed him to have his own way with
the heiress, undisputed.  The chance of a wife with two hundred
thousand pounds is a godsend, which comes in a man's life too seldom to
be neglected, let that chance be never so remote.

Frank was the heir to a large embarrassed property; and, therefore, the
heads of families, putting their wisdoms together, had thought it most
meet that this daughter of Plutus should, if possible, fall to his
lot.  But not so thought the Honourable George; and not so thought
another gentleman who was at that time an inmate of Courcy Castle.

These suitors perhaps somewhat despised their young rival's efforts. It
may be that they had sufficient worldly wisdom to know that so
important a crisis of life is not settled among quips and jokes, and
that Frank was too much in jest to be in earnest.  But be that as it
may, his love-making did not stand in the way of their love-making; nor
his hopes, if he had any, in the way of their hopes.

The Honourable George had discussed the matter with the Honourable John
in a properly fraternal manner.  It may be that John had also an eye to
the heiress; but, if so, he had ceded his views to his brother's
superior claims; for it came about that they understood each other very
well, and John favoured George with salutary advice on the occasion.

'If it is to be done at all, it should be done very sharp,' said John.

'As sharp as you like,' said George.  'I'm not the fellow to be
studying three months in what attitude I'll fall at a girl's feet.'

'No: and when you are there you mustn't take three months more to study
how you'll get up again.  If you do it at all, you must do it sharp,'
repeated John, putting great stress on his advice.

'I have said a few soft words to her already, and she didn't seem to
take them badly,' said George.

'She's no chicken, you know,' remarked John; 'and with a woman like
that, beating about the bush never does any good. The chances are she
won't have you--that's of course; plums like that don't fall into a
man's mouth merely for shaking the tree. But it's possible she may; and
if she will, she's as likely to take you to-day as this day six
months.  If I were you I'd write her a letter.'

'Write her a letter--eh?' said George, who did not altogether dislike
the advice, for it seemed to take from his shoulders the burden of
preparing a spoken address.  Though he was so glib in speaking about
the farmers' daughters, he felt that he should have some little
difficulty in making known his passion to Miss Dunstable, by word of
mouth.

'Yes; write a letter.  If she'll take you at all, she'll take you that
way; half the matches going are made up by writing letters.  Write her
a letter and get it put on her dressing-table.'  George said that he
would, and so he did.

George spoke quite truly when he hinted that he had said a few soft
things to Miss Dunstable.  Miss Dunstable, however, was accustomed to
hear soft things.  She had been carried much about in society among
fashionable people since, on the settlement of her father's will, she
had been pronounced heiress to all the ointment of Lebanon; and many
men had made calculations respecting her similar to those which were
now animating the brain of the Honourable George de Courcy.  She was
already quite accustomed to being a target at which spendthrifts and
the needy rich might shoot their arrows: accustomed to being shot at,
and tolerably accustomed to protect herself without making scenes in
the world, or rejecting the advantageous establishments offered to her
with any loud expressions of disdain.  The Honourable George, 
therefore, had been permitted to say soft things very much as a matter
of course.

And very little more outward fracas arose from the correspondence which
followed than had arisen from the soft things so said.  George wrote
the letter, and had it duly conveyed to Miss Dunstable's bed-chamber. 
Miss Dunstable duly received it, and had her answer conveyed back
discreetly to George's hands.  The correspondence ran as follows:--

'Courcy Castle, Aug. -, 185-.  
'MY DEAREST MISS DUNSTABLE,

'I cannot but flatter myself that you must have perceived from
my manner that you are not indifferent to me. Indeed, indeed,
you are not. I may truly say, and swear' (these last strong
words had been put in by the special counsel of the Honourable
John), 'that if ever a man loved a woman truly, I truly love
you. You may think it very odd that I should say this in a
letter instead of speaking it out before your face; but your
powers of raillery are so great' ('touch her up about her wit'
had been the advice of the Honourable John) 'that I am all but
afraid to encounter them. Dearest, dearest Martha--oh do not
blame me for so addressing you!--if you will trust your
happiness to me you shall never find that you have been
deceived. My ambition shall be to make you shine in that
circle which you are so well qualified to adorn and to see you
firmly fixed in that sphere of fashion for which your tastes
adapt you.

'I may safely assert--and I do assert it with my hand on my
heart--that I am actuated by no mercenary motives. Far be it
from me to marry any woman--no, not a princess--on account of
her money. No marriage can be happy without mutual affection;
and I do fully trust--no, not trust, but hope--that there may be
such between you and me, dearest Miss Dunstable. Whatever
settlements you might propose I would accede to. It is you,
your sweet person, that I love, not your money.

'For myself, I need not remind you that I am the second son of
my father; and that, as such, I hold no inconsiderable station
in the world. My intention is to get into Parliament, and to
make a name for myself, if I can, among those who shine in the
House of Commons. My elder brother, Lord Porlock, is, you are
aware, unmarried; and we all fear that the family honours are
not likely to be perpetuated by him, as he has all manner of
troublesome liaisons which will probably prevent his settling
in life. There is nothing at all of that kind in my way. It
will indeed be a delight to place a coronet on the head of my
lovely Martha: a coronet which can give no fresh grace to her,
but which will be so much adorned by her wearing it.

'Dearest, Miss Dunstable, I shall wait with the utmost
impatience for your answer; and now, burning with hope that it
may not be altogether unfavourable to my love, I beg
permission to sign myself

'Your own most devoted, 
'GEORGE DE COURCY'

The ardent lover had not to wait long for an answer from his mistress. 
She found this letter on her toilet-table one night as she went to
bed.  The next morning she came down to breakfast and met her swain
with the most unconcerned air in the world; so much so that he began to
think, as he munched his toast with rather a shamefaced look, that the
letter on which so much was to depend had not yet come safely to hand. 
But his suspense was not of a prolonged duration.  After breakfast, as
was his wont, he went out to the stables with his brother and Frank
Gresham; and while there, Miss Dunstable's man, coming up to him,
touched his hat, and put a letter into his hand.

Frank, who knew the man, glanced at the letter and looked at his
cousin; but he said nothing.  He was, however, a little jealous, and
felt that an injury was done to him by any correspondence between Miss
Dunstable and his cousin George.

Miss Dunstable's reply was as follows; and it may be remarked that it
was written in a very clear and well-penned hand, and one which
certainly did not betray much emotion of the heart:-

'MY DEAR MR DE COURCY,

'I am sorry to say that I had not perceived from your manner
that you entertained any peculiar feelings towards me; as, had
I done so, I should at once have endeavoured to put an end to
them. I am much flattered by the way in which you speak of me;
but I am in too humble a position to return your affection;
and can, therefore, only express a hope that you may be soon
able to eradicate it from your bosom. A letter is a very good
way of making an offer, and as such I do not think it at all
odd; but I certainly did not expect such an honour last night.
As to my raillery, I trust it has never yet hurt you. I can
assure you that it never shall. I hope you will soon have a
worthier ambition than that to which you allude; for I am well
aware that no attempt will ever make me shine anywhere.

'I am quite sure you have had no mercenary motives: such
motives in marriage are very base, and quite below your name
and lineage. Any little fortune that I may have must be a
matter of indifference to one who looks forward, as you do, to
put a coronet on his wife's brow. Nevertheless, for the sake
of the family, I trust that Lord Porlock, in spite of his
obstacles, may live to do the same for a wife of his own some
of these days. I am glad to hear that there is nothing to
interfere with your own prospects of domestic felicity.

'Sincerely hoping that you may be perfectly successful in your
proud ambition to shine in Parliament, and regretting
extremely that I cannot share that ambition with you, I beg to
subscribe myself, with very great respect,

'Your sincere well-wisher, 
'MARTHA DUNSTABLE'

The Honourable George, with that modesty which so well became him,
accepted Miss Dunstable's reply as a final answer to his little
proposition, and troubled her with no further courtship. As he said to
his brother John, no harm had been done, and he might have better luck
next time.  But there was an intimate of Courcy Castle who was somewhat
more pertinacious in his search after love and wealth.  This was no
other than Mr Moffat: a gentleman whose ambition was not satisfied by
the cares of his Barchester contest, or the possession of one affianced
bride.

Mr Moffat was, as we have said, a man of wealth; but we all know, from
the lessons of early youth, how the love of money increases and gains
strength by its own success.  Nor was he a man of so mean a spirit as
to be satisfied with mere wealth.  He desired also place and station,
and gracious countenance among the great ones of the earth.  Hence had 
come his adherence to the De Courcys; hence his seat in Parliament; and
hence, also, his perhaps ill-considered match with Miss Gresham.

There is no doubt but that the privilege of matrimony offers 
opportunities to money-loving young men which ought not to be lightly
abused.  Too many young men marry without giving any consideration to
the matter whatever.  It is not that they are indifferent to money, but
that they recklessly miscalculate their own value, and omit to look
around and see how much is done by those who are more careful.  A man
can be young but once, and, except in cases of a special interposition
of Providence, can marry but once.  The chance once thrown away may be
said to be irrevocable!  How, in after-life, do men toil and turmoil
through long years to attain some prospect of doubtful advancement! 
Half that trouble, half that care, a tithe of that circumspection 
would, in early youth, have probably secured to them the enduring
comfort of a wife's wealth.

You will see men labouring night and day to become bank directors; and
even a bank direction may only be the road to ruin.  Others will spend
years in degrading subserviency to obtain a niche in a will; and the
niche, when at last obtained and enjoyed, is but a sorry payment for
all that has been endured.  Others again, struggle harder still, and go
through even deeper waters: they make wills for themselves, forge
stock-shares, and fight with unremitting, painful labour to appear to
be the thing they are not.  Now, in many of these cases, all this might
have been spared had the men made adequate use of those opportunities
which youth and youthful charms afford once--and once only.  There is no
road to wealth so easy and respectable as that of matrimony; that, is
of course, provided that the aspirant declines the slow course to
honest work.  But then, we can so seldom put old heads on young
shoulders!

In the case of Mr Moffat, we may perhaps say that a specimen was
produced of this bird, so rare in the land. His shoulders were certainly
young, seeing that he was not yet six-and-twenty; but his head had ever
been old. From the moment when he was first put forth to go alone--at
the age of twenty-one--his life had been one calculation how he could
make the most of himself. He had allowed himself to be betrayed into
folly by an unguarded heart; no youthful indiscretion had marred his
prospects. He had made the most of himself. Without wit or depth, or any
mental gift--without honesty of purpose or industry for good work--he
had been for two years sitting member for Barchester; was the guest of
Lord de Courcy; was engaged to the eldest daughter of one of the best
commoners' families in England; and was, when he first began to think of
Miss Dunstable, sanguine that his re-election to Parliament was secure.

When, however, at this period he began to calculate what his position
in the world really was, it occurred to him that he was doing an
ill-judged thing in marrying Miss Gresham.  Why marry a penniless
girl--for Augusta's trifle of a fortune was not a penny in his
estimation--while there was Miss Dunstable in the world to be won?  His
own six or seven thousand a year, quite unembarrassed as it was, was
certainly a great thing; but what might he not do if to that he could
add the almost fabulous wealth of the great heiress?  Was she not here,
put absolutely in his path?  Would it not be a wilful throwing away of
a chance not to avail himself of it?  He must, to be sure, lose the De
Courcy friendship; but if he should then have secured his Barchester
seat for the usual term of parliamentary session, he might be able to
spare that.  He would also, perhaps, encounter some Gresham enmity:
this was a point on which he did think more than once: but what will a 
man not encounter for the sake of two hundred thousand pounds?

It was thus that Mr Moffat argued with himself, with much prudence, and
brought himself to resolve that he would at any rate become the
candidate for the great prize.  He also, therefore, began to say soft
things; and it must be admitted that he said them with more considerate
propriety than had the Honourable George.  Mr Moffat had an idea that
Miss Dunstable was not a fool, and that in order to catch her he must
do more than endeavour to lay salt on her tail, in the guise of
flattery.  It was evident to him that she was a bird of some cunning,
not to be caught by an ordinary gin, such as those commonly in use with
the Honourable Georges of Society.

It seemed to Mr Moffat, that though Miss Dunstable was so sprightly, so
full of fun, and so ready to chatter on all subjects, she well knew the
value of her own money, and of her position as dependent on it: he
perceived that she never flattered the countess, and seemed to be no
whit absorbed by the titled grandeur of her host's family.  He gave her
credit, therefore, for an independent spirit: and an independent spirit
in his estimation was one that placed its sole dependence on a
respectable balance at its banker's.

Working on these ideas, Mr Moffat commenced operations in such manner
that his overtures to the heiress should not, if unsuccessful,
interfere with the Greshamsbury engagement.  He began by making common
cause with Miss Dunstable: their positions in the world, he said to
her, were closely similar. They had both risen from the lower classes
by the strength of honest industry: they were both now wealthy, and had
both hitherto made such use of their wealth as to induce the highest
aristocracy in England to admit them into their circles.

'Yes, Mr Moffat,' had Miss Dunstable remarked; 'and if all that I hear
be true, to admit you into their very families.'

At this Mr Moffat slightly demurred.  He would not affect, he said, to
misunderstand what Miss Dunstable meant.  There had been something said
on the probability of such an event; but he begged Miss Dunstable not
to believe all that she heard on such subjects.

'I do not believe much,' said she; 'but I certainly did think that that
might be credited.'

Mr Moffat went on to show how it behoved them both, in holding out
their hands half-way to meet the aristocratic overtures that were made
to them, not to allow themselves to be made use of.  The aristocracy,
according to Mr Moffat, were people of a very nice sort; the best
acquaintance in the world; a portion of mankind to be noticed by whom
should be one of the first objects in the life of the Dunstables and 
the Moffats.  But the Dunstables and Moffats should be very careful to
give little or nothing in return.  Much, very much in return, would be
looked for.  The aristocracy, said Mr Moffat, were not a people to
allow in the light of their countenance to shine forth without looking
for a quid pro quo, for some compensating value.  In all their
intercourse with the Dunstables and Moffats, they would expect a
payment. It was for the Dunstables and Moffats to see that, at any 
rate, they did not pay more for the article they got than its market
value.

They way in which she, Miss Dunstable, and he, Mr Moffat, would be
required to pay would be by taking each of them some poor scion of the
aristocracy in marriage; and thus expending their hard-earned wealth in
procuring high-priced pleasures for some well-born pauper.  Against
this, peculiar caution was to be used.  Of course, the further
induction to be shown was this: that people so circumstanced should
marry among themselves; the Dunstables and the Moffats each with the 
other and not tumble into the pitfalls prepared for them.

Whether these great lessons had any lasting effect on Miss Dunstable's
mind may be doubted.  Perhaps she had already made up her mind on the
subject which Mr Moffat so well discussed. She was older than Mr
Moffat, and, in spite of his two years of parliamentary experience, had
perhaps more knowledge of the world with which she had to deal.  But
she listened to what he said with complacency; understood his object as
well as she had that of his aristocratic rival; was no whit offended;
but groaned in her spirit as she thought of the wrongs of Augusta
Gresham.

But all this good advice, however, would not win the money for Mr
Moffat without some more decided step; and that step he soon decided on
taking, feeling assured that what he had said would have its due weight
with the heiress.

The party at Courcy Castle was now soon about to be broken up. The male
De Courcys were going down to a Scotch mountain. The female De Courcys
were to be shipped off to an Irish castle.  Mr Moffat was to go up to
town to prepare his petition.  Miss Dunstable was again about to start
on a foreign tour in behalf of her physician and attendants; and Frank
Gresham was at last to be allowed to go to Cambridge; that is to say,
unless his success with Miss Dunstable should render such a step on his
part quite preposterous.

'I think you may speak now, Frank,' said the countess.  'I really think
you may: you have known her now for a considerable time; and, as far as
I can judge, she is very fond of you.'

'Nonsense, aunt,' said Frank; 'she doesn't care a button for me.'

'I think differently; and lookers-on, you know, always understand the
game best.  I suppose you are not afraid to ask her.'

'Afraid!' said Frank, in a tone of considerable scorn.  He almost made
up his mind that he would ask her to show that he was not afraid.  His
only obstacle to doing so was, that he had not the slightest intention
of marrying her.

There was to be but one other great event before the party broke up,
and that was a dinner at the Duke of Omnium's.  The duke had already
declined to come to Courcy; but he had in a measure atoned for this by
asking some of the guests to join a great dinner which he was about to
give to his neighbours.

Mr Moffat was to leave Courcy Castle the day after the dinner-party,
and he therefore determined to make his great attempt on the morning of
that day.  It was with some difficulty that he brought about an
opportunity; but at last he did so, and found himself alone with Miss
Dunstable in the walks of Courcy Park.

'It is a strange thing, is it not,' said he, recurring to his old view
of the same subject, 'that I should be going to dine with the Duke of
Omnium--the richest man, they say, among the whole English aristocracy?'

'Men of that kind entertain everybody, I believe, now and then,' said
Miss Dunstable, not very civilly.

'I believe they do; but I am not going as one of the everybodies.  I am
going from Lord de Courcy's house with some of his own family.  I have
no pride in that--not the least; I have more pride in my father's honest
industry.  But it shows what money does in this country of ours.'

'Yes, indeed; money does a great deal many queer things.'  In saying
this Miss Dunstable could not but think that money had done a very
queer thing in inducing Miss Gresham to fall in love with Mr Moffat.

'Yes; wealth is very powerful: here we are, Miss Dunstable, the most
honoured guests in the house.'

'Oh!  I don't know about that; you may be, for you are a member of
Parliament, and all that--'

'No; not a member now, Miss Dunstable.'

'Well, you will be, and that's all the same; but I have no such title
to honour, thank God.'

They walked on in silence for a little while, for Mr Moffat hardly knew
who to manage the business he had in hand.  'It is quite delightful to
watch these people,' he said at last; 'now they accuse us of being
tuft-hunters.'

'Do they?' said Miss Dunstable.  'Upon my word I didn't know that
anybody ever so accused me.'

'I didn't mean you and me personally.'

'Oh!  I'm glad of that.'

'But that is what the world says of persons of our class.  Now it seems
to me that toadying is all on the other side.  The countess here does
toady you, and so do the young ladies.'

'Do they? if so, upon my word I didn't know it.  But, to tell the
truth, I don't think much of such things.  I live mostly to myself, Mr
Moffat.'

'I see that you do, and I admire you for it; but, Miss Dunstable, you
cannot always live so,' and Mr Moffat looked at her in a manner which
gave her the first intimation of his coming burst of tenderness.

'That's as may be, Mr Moffat,' said she.

He went on beating about the bush for some time--giving her to 
understand now necessary it was that persons situated as they were
should live either for themselves or for each other, and that, above
all things, they should beware of falling into the mouths of voracious
aristocratic lions who go about looking for prey--till they came to a
turn in the grounds; at which Miss Dunstable declared her intention of
going in.  She had walked enough, she said.  As by this time Mr
Moffat's immediate intentions were becoming visible she thought it 
prudent to retire.  'Don't let me take you in, Mr Moffat; but my boots
are a little damp, and Dr Easyman will never forgive me if I do not
hurry in as fast as I can.'

'Your feet damp?--I hope not: I do hope not,' said he, with a look of
the greatest solicitude.

'Oh!  it's nothing to signify; but it's well to be prudent, you know. 
Good morning, Mr Moffat.'

'Miss Dunstable!'

'Eh--yes!' and Miss Dunstable stopped in the grand path.  'I won't let
you return with me, Mr Moffat, because I know you were coming in so
soon.'

'Miss Dunstable; I shall be leaving here to-morrow.'

'Yes; and I go myself the day after.'

'I know it.  I am going to town and you are going abroad.  It may be
long--very long--before we meet again.'

'About Easter,' said Miss Dunstable; 'that is, if the doctor doesn't
known up on the road.'

'And I had, had wish to say something before we part for so long a
time.  Miss Dunstable--'

'Stop!--Mr Moffat.  Let me ask you one question.  I'll hear anything
that you have got to say, but on one condition: that is, that Miss
Augusta Gresham shall be by while you say it.  Will you consent to
that?'

'Miss Augusta Gresham,' said he, 'has no right to listen to my private
conversation.'

'Has she not, Mr Moffat? then I think she should have.  I, at any rate,
will not so far interfere with what I look on as her undoubted
privileges as to be a party to any secret in which she may not
participate.'

'But, Miss Dunstable--'

And to tell you fairly, Mr Moffat, any secret that you do tell me, I
shall most undoubtedly repeat to her before dinner.  Good morning, Mr
Moffat; my feet are certainly a little damp, and if I stay a moment
longer, Dr Easyman will put off my foreign trip for at least a week.' 
And so she left him standing alone in the middle of the gravel-walk.

For a moment or two, Mr Moffat consoled himself in his misfortune by
thinking how he might avenge himself on Miss Dunstable.  Soon, however,
such futile ideas left his brain. Why should he give over the chase
because the rich galleon had escaped him on this, his first cruise in
pursuit of her? Such prizes were not to be won so easily.  His present 
objection clearly consisted in his engagement to Miss Gresham, and in
that only.  Let that engagement be at an end, notoriously and publicly
broken off, and this objection would fall to the ground.  Yes; ships so
richly freighted were not to be run down in one summer morning's plain
sailing.  Instead of looking for his revenge on Miss Dunstable, it 
would be more prudent in him--more in keeping with his character--to
pursue his object, and overcome such difficulties as he might find his
way.



CHAPTER XIX

THE DUKE OF OMNIUM

The Duke of Omnium was, as we have said, a bachelor.  Not the less on
that account did he on certain rare gala days entertain the beauty of
the county in his magnificent rural seat, or the female fashion of
London in Belgrave Square; but on this occasion the dinner at Gatherum
Castle--for such was the name of his mansion--was to be confined to the
lords of the creation.  It was to be one of those days on which he 
collected round his board all the notables of the county, in order that
his popularity might not wane, or the established glory of his
hospitable house become dim.

On such an occasion it was not probable that Lord de Courcy would be
one of the guests.  They party, indeed, who went from Courcy Castle was
not large, and consisted of the Honourable George, Mr Moffat, and Frank
Gresham.  They went in a tax-cart, with a tandem horse, driven very
knowingly by George de Courcy; and the fourth seat on the back of the 
vehicle was occupied by a servant, who was to look after the horses at
Gatherum.

The Honourable George drove either well or luckily, for he reached the
duke's house in safety; but he drove very fast.  Poor Miss Dunstable! 
what would have been her lot had anything but good happened to that
vehicle, so richly freighted with her three lovers!  They did not
quarrel as to the prize, and all reached Gatherum Castle in good-humour
with each other.

The castle was new building of white stone, lately erected at an
enormous cost by one of the first architects of the day.  It was an
immense pile, and seemed to cover ground enough for a moderate-sized
town.  But, nevertheless, report said that when it was completed, the
noble owner found that he had no rooms to live in; and that, on this
account, when disposed to study his own comfort, he resided in a house
of perhaps one-tenth of the size, built by his grandfather in another 
county.

Gatherum Castle would probably be called Italian in its style of
architecture; though it may, I think, be doubted whether any such
edifice, or anything like it, was ever seen in any part of Italy.  It
was a vast edifice; irregular in height--or it appeared to be--having
long wings on each side too high to be passed over by the eye as mere
adjuncts to the mansion, and a portico so large as to make the house
behind it look like another building of a greater altitude.  This
portico was supported by Ionic columns, and was in itself doubtless a 
beautiful structure.  It was approached by a flight of steps, very
broad and very grand; but, as an approach, by a flight of steps hardly
suits an Englishman's house, to the immediate entrance of which it is
necessary that his carriage should drive, there was another front door
in one of the wings which was commonly used.  A carriage, however,
could on very stupendously grand occasions--the visits, for instance, of
queens and kings, and royal dukes--be brought up under the portico; as
the steps had been so constructed as to admit of a road, with a rather
stiff ascent, being made close in front of the wing up into the very
porch.

0pening from the porch was the grand hall, which extended up to the top
of the house.  It was magnificent, indeed; being decorated with
many-coloured marbles, and hung round with various trophies of the
house of Omnium; banners were there, and armour; the sculptured busts
of many noble progenitors; full-length figures of marble of those who
had been especially prominent; and every monument of glory and wealth, 
long years, and great achievements could bring together.  If only a man
could but live in his hall and be for ever happy there!  But the Duke
of Omnium could not live happily in his hall; and the fact was, that
the architect, in contriving this magnificent entrance for his own
honour and fame, had destroyed the duke's house as regards most of the
ordinary purposes of residence.

Nevertheless, Gatherum Castle is a very noble pile; and, standing as it
does an eminence, has a very fine effect when seen from many a distant
knoll and verdant-wooded hill.

At seven o'clock, Mr de Courcy and his friends got down from their drag
at the smaller door--for this was no day on which to mount up under the
portico; nor was that any suitable vehicle to have been entitled to
such honour.  Frank felt some excitement a little stronger than that
usual to him at such moments, for he had never yet been in company with
the Duke of Omnium; and he rather puzzled himself to think on what
points he would talk to the man who was the largest landowner in that
county in which he himself had so great an interest.  He, however, made
up his mind that he would allow the duke to choose his own subjects;
merely reserving to himself the right of pointing out how deficient in
gorse covers was West Barsetshire--that being the duke's division.

They were soon divested of their coats and hats, and, without entering
on the magnificence of the great hall, were conducted through rather a
narrow passage into rather a small drawing-room--small, that is, in
proportion to the number of gentlemen there assembled.  There might be
about thirty, and Frank was inclined to think that they were almost
crowded.  A man came forward to greet them when their names were 
announced; but our hero at once knew that he was not the duke; for this
man was fat and short, whereas the duke was thin and tall.

There was a great hubbub going on; for everybody seemed to be talking
to his neighbour; or, in default of a neighbour, to himself.  It was
clear that the exalted rank of their host had put very little
constraint on his guests' tongues, for they chatted away with as much
freedom as farmers at an ordinary.

'Which is the duke?' at last Frank contrived to whisper to his cousin.

'Oh;--he's not here,' said George; 'I suppose he'll be in presently.  I
believe he never shows till just before dinner.'

Frank, of course, had nothing further to say; but he already began to
feel himself a little snubbed: he thought that the duke, duke though he
was, when he asked people to dinner should be there to tell them that
he was glad to see them.

More people flashed into the room, and Frank found himself rather
closely wedged in with a stout clergyman of his acquaintance.  He was
not badly off, for Mr Athill was a friend of his own, who had held a
living near Greshamsbury.  Lately, however, at the lamented decease of
Dr Stanhope--who had died of apoplexy at his villa in Italy--Mr Athill
had been presented with the better preferment of Eiderdown, and had, 
therefore, removed to another part of the county.  He was somewhat of a
bon-vivant, and a man who thoroughly understood dinner-parties; and
with much good nature he took Frank under his special protection.

'You stick to me, Mr Gresham,' he said, 'when we go into the 
dining-room.  I'm an old hand at the duke's dinners, and know how to
make a friend comfortable as well as myself.'

'But why doesn't the duke come in?' demanded Frank.

'He'll be here as soon as dinner is ready,' said Mr Athill.  'Or,
rather, the dinner will be ready as soon as he is here. I don't care,
therefore, how soon he comes.'

He was beginning to be impatient, for the room was now nearly full, and
it seemed evident that no other guests were coming; when suddenly a
bell rang, and a gong was sounded, and at the same instant a door that
had not yet been used flew open, and a very plainly dressed, plain,
tall man entered the room.  Frank at once knew that he was at last in
the presence of the Duke of Omnium.

But his grace, late as he was in commencing the duties as host, seemed
in no hurry to make up for lost time.  He quietly stood on the rug,
with his back to the empty grate, and spoke one or two words in a very
low voice to one or two gentlemen who stood nearest to him.  The crowd,
in the meanwhile, became suddenly silent.  Frank, when he found that 
the duke did not come and speak to him, felt that he ought to go and
speak to the duke; but no one else did so, and when he whispered his
surprise to Mr Athill, that gentleman told him that this was the duke's
practice on all such occasions.

'Fothergill,' said the duke--and it was the only word he had yet spoken
out loud--'I believe we are ready for dinner.'  Now Mr Fothergill was
the duke's land-agent, and he it was who had greeted Frank and his
friends at their entrance.

Immediately the gong was again sounded, and another door leading out of
the drawing-room into the dining-room was opened.  The duke led the
way, and then the guests followed. 'Stick close to me, Mr Gresham,'
said Athill, 'we'll get about the middle of the table, where we shall
be cosy--and on the other side of the room, out of this dreadful
draught--I know the place well, Mr Gresham; stick to me.'

Mr Athill, who was a pleasant, chatty companion, had hardly seated
himself, and was talking to Frank as quickly as he could, when Mr
Fothergill, who sat at the bottom of the table, asked him to say
grace.  It seemed to be quite out of the question that the duke should
take any trouble over his guests whatever.  Mr Athill consequently
dropped the word he was speaking, and uttered a prayer--if it was a
prayer--that they might all have grateful hearts for which God was about
to give them.

If it was a prayer!  As far as my own experience goes, such utterances
are seldom prayers, seldom can be prayers.  And if not prayers, what
then?  To me it is unintelligible that the full tide of glibbest chatter
can be stopped at a moment in the midst of profuse good living, and the
Given thanked becomingly in words of heartfelt praise.  Setting aside
for the moment what one daily hears and sees, may not one declare that
a change so sudden is not within the compass of the human mind? But
then, to such reasoning one cannot but add what one does hear and see;
one cannot but judge of the ceremony by the manner in which one sees it
performed--uttered, that is--and listened to.  Clergymen there are--one 
meets them now and then--who endeavour to give to the dinner-table
grace some of the solemnity of a church ritual, and what is the
effect?  Much the same as though one were to be interrupted for a
minute in the midst of one of our church liturgies to hear a
drinking-song.

And it will be argued, that a man need be less thankful because, at the
moment of receiving, he utters not thanksgiving? or will it be
thought that a man is made thankful because what is called a grace is
uttered after dinner?  It can hardly be imagined that any one will so
argue, or so think.

Dinner-graces are, probably, the last remaining relic of certain daily
services which the Church in olden days enjoined: nones, complines, and
vespers were others.  Of the nones and complines we have happily got
quit; and it might be well if we could get rid of the dinner-grace
also.  Let any man ask himself whether, on his own part, they are acts
of prayer and thanksgiving--and if not that, what then?  It is, I know,
alleged that graces are said before dinner, because our Saviour uttered
a blessing before his last supper.  I cannot say that the idea of such
analogy is pleasing to me.

When the large party entered the dining-room one or two gentlemen might
be seen to come in from some other door and set themselves at the table
near to the duke's chair.  These were guests of his own, who were
staying in the house, his particular friends, the men with whom he
lived: the others were strangers whom he fed, perhaps once a year, in
order that his name might be known in the land as that of one who 
distributed food and wine hospitably through the county.  The food and
wine, the attendance also, and the view of the vast repository of plate
he vouchsafed willingly to his county neighbours;--but it was beyond his
good nature to talk to them.  To judge by the present appearance of
most of them, they were quite as well satisfied to be left alone.

Frank was altogether a stranger there, but Mr Athill knew every one at
the table.

'That's Apjohn,' said he: 'don't you know, Mr Apjohn, the attorney from
Barchester?  he's always here; he does some of Fothergill's law
business, and makes himself useful.  If any fellow knows the value of a
good dinner, he does.  You'll see that the duke's hospitality will not
be thrown away on him.'

'It's very much thrown away on me, I know,' said Frank, who could not
at all put up with the idea of sitting down to dinner without having
been spoken to by his host.

'Oh, nonsense!' said his clerical friend; 'you'll enjoy yourself
amazingly by and by.  There is not much champagne in any other house in
Barsetshire; and then the claret--' And Mr Athill pressed his lips
together, and gently shook his head, meaning to signify by the motion
that the claret of Gatherum Castle was sufficient atonement for any
penance which a man might have to go through in his mode of obtaining
it.

'Who is that funny little man sitting there, next but one to Mr de
Courcy?  I never saw such a queer fellow in my life.'

'Don't you know old Bolus?  Well, I thought every one in Barsetshire
knew Bolus; you especially should do so, as he is such a dear friend of
Dr Thorne.'

'A dear friend of Dr Thorne?'

'Yes; he was apothecary at Scarington in the old days, before Dr
Fillgrave came into vogue.  I remember when Bolus was thought to be a
very good sort of doctor.'

'Is he--is he--' whispered Frank, 'is he by way of a gentleman?'

'Ha! ha! ha!  Well, I suppose we must be charitable, and say that he is
quite as good, at any rate, as many others there are here--' and Mr
Athill, as he spoke, whispered into Frank's ear, 'You see there's
Finnie here, another Barchester attorney.  Now, I really think where
Finnie goes, Bolus may go too.'

'The more the merrier, I suppose,' said Frank.

'Well, something a little like that.  I wonder why Thorne is not here? 
I'm sure he was asked.'

'Perhaps he did not particularly wish to meet Finnie and Bolus. Do you
know, Mr Athill, I think he was quite right not to come. As for myself,
I wish I was anywhere else.'

'Ha! ha! ha!  You don't know the duke's ways yet; and what's more,
you're young, you happy fellow!  But Thorne should have more sense; he
ought to show himself here.'

The gormandizing was now going on at a tremendous rate.  Though the
volubility of their tongues had been for a while stopped by the first
shock of the duke's presence, the guests seemed to feel no such
constraint upon their teeth.  They fed, one may almost say, rabidly,
and gave their orders to the servants in an eager manner; much more
impressive than that usual at smaller parties.  Mr Apjohn, who sat 
immediately opposite to Frank, had, by some well-planned manoeuvre,
contrived to get before him the jowl of a salmon; but, unfortunately,
he was not for a while equally successful in the article of sauce.  A
very limited portion--so at least thought Mr Apjohn--had been put on his
plate; and a servant, with a huge sauce tureen, absolutely passed
behind his back inattentive to his audible requests.  Poor Mr Apjohn in
his despair turned round to arrest the man by his coat-tails; but he
was a moment too late, and all but fell backwards on the floor.  As he
righted himself he muttered an anathema, and looked with a face of
anguish at his plate.

'Anything the matter, Apjohn?' said Mr Fothergill, kindly, seeing the
utter despair written on the poor man's countenance; 'can I get
anything for you?'

'The sauce!' said Mr Apjohn, in a voice that would have melted a
hermit; and as he looked at Mr Fothergill, he point at the now distant
sinner, who was dispensing his melted ambrosia at least ten heads
upwards, away from the unfortunate supplicant.

Mr Fothergill, however, knew wher