e to look for balm for such wounds,
and in a minute or two, Mr Apjohn was employed quite to his heart's
content.

'Well,' said Frank to his neighbour, 'it may be very well once in a
way; but I think that on the whole Dr Thorne is right.'

'My dear Mr Gresham, see the world on all sides,' said Mr Athill, who
had also been somewhat intent on the gratification of his own appetite,
though with an energy less evident than that of the gentleman
opposite.  'See the world on all sides if you have an opportunity; and,
believe me, a good dinner now and then is a very good thing.'

'Yes; but I don't like eating with hogs.'

'Whish-h! softly, softly, Mr Gresham, or you'll disturb Mr Apjohn's
digestion.  Upon my word, he'll want it all before he has done.  Now, I
like this kind of thing once in a way.'

'Do you?' said Frank, in a tone that was almost savage.

'Yes; indeed I do.  One sees so much character.  And after all, what
harm does it do?'

'My idea is that people should live with those whose society is
pleasant to them.'

'Live--yes, Mr Gresham--I agree with you there.  It wouldn't do for me
to live with the Duke of Omnium; I shouldn't understand, or probably
approve, his ways. Nor should I, perhaps, much like the constant
presence of Mr Apjohn. But now and then--once in a year or so--I do own
I like to see them both. Here's the cup; now, whatever you do, Mr
Gresham, don't pass the cup without tasting it.'

And so the dinner passed on, slowly enough as Frank thought, but all
too quickly for Mr Apjohn.  It passed away, and the wine came
circulating freely.  The tongues again were loosed, the teeth being
released from their labours, and under the influence of the claret the
duke's presence was forgotten.

But very speedily the coffee was brought.  'This will soon be over
now,' said Frank, to himself, thankfully; for, though he be no means
despised good claret, he had lost his temper too completely to enjoy it
at the present moment.  But he was much mistaken; the farce as yet was
only at its commencement. The duke took his cup of coffee, and so did
the few friends who sat close to him; but the beverage did not seem to
be in great request with the majority of the guests.  When the duke had
taken his modicum, he rose up and silently retired, saying no word and
making no sign.  And then the farce commenced.

'Now, gentlemen,' said Mr Fothergill, cheerily, 'we are all right. 
Apjohn, is there claret there?  Mr Bolus, I know you stick to the
Madeira; you are quite right, for there isn't too much of it left, and
my belief is there'll never be more like it.'

And so the duke's hospitality went on, and the duke's guests drank
merrily for the next two hours.

'Shan't we see any more of him?' asked Frank.

'Any more of whom?' said Mr Athill.

'Of the duke?'

'Oh, no; you'll see no more of him.  He always goes when the coffee
comes.  It's brought in as an excuse.  We've had enough of the light of
his countenance to last till next year.  The duke and I are excellent
friends; and have been so these fifteen years; but I never see more of
him than that.'

'I shall go away,' said Frank.

'Nonsense.  Mr de Courcy and your other friend won't stir for this hour
yet.'

'I don't care.  I shall walk on, and they may catch me.  I may be
wrong; but it seems to me that a man insults me when he asks me to dine
with him and never speaks to me.  I don't care if he be ten times Duke
of Omnium; he can't be more than a gentleman, and as such I am his
equal.'  And then, having thus given vent to his feelings in somewhat
high-flown language, he walked forth and trudged away along the road 
towards Courcy.

Frank Gresham had been born and bred a Conservative, whereas the Duke
of Omnium was well known as a consistent Whig.  There is no one so
devoutly resolved to admit of no superior as your Conservative, born
and bred, no one so inclined to high domestic despotism as your
thoroughgoing consistent old Whig.

When he had proceeded about six miles, Frank was picked up by his
friends; but even then his anger had hardly cooled.

'Was the duke as civil as ever when you took your leave of him?' said
he to his cousin George, as he took his seat on the drag.

'The juke was jeuced jude wine--lem me tell you that, old fella,'
hiccupped out the Honourable George, as he touched up the leader under
the flank.



CHAPTER XX

THE PROPOSAL

And now the departure from Courcy Castle came rapidly one after the
other, and there remained but one more evening before Miss Dunstable's
carriage was to be packed.  The countess, in the early moments of
Frank's courtship, had controlled his ardour and checked the rapidity
of his amorous professions; but as days, and at last weeks, wore away,
she found that it was necessary to stir the fire which she had before
endeavoured to slacken.

'There will be nobody here to-night but our own circle,' said she to
him, 'and I really think you should tell Miss Dunstable what your
intentions are.  She will have fair ground to complain of you if you
don't.'

Frank began to feel that he was in a dilemma.  He had commenced making
love to Miss Dunstable partly because he liked the amusement, and
partly from a satirical propensity to quiz his aunt by appearing to
fall into her scheme.  But he had overshot the mark, and did not know
what answer to give when he was thus called upon to make a downright 
proposal.  And then, although he did not care two rushes about Miss
Dunstable in the way of love, he nevertheless experienced a sort of
jealousy when he found that she appeared to be indifferent to him, and
that she corresponded the meanwhile with his cousin George.  Though all
their flirtations had been carried on on both sides palpably by way of
fun, though Frank had told himself ten times a day that his heart was
true to Mary Thorne, yet he had an undefined feeling that it behoved
Miss Dunstable to be a little in love with him.  He was not quite at
ease in that she was not a little melancholy now that his departure was
so nigh; and, above all, he was anxious to know what were the real
facts about that letter.  He had in his own breast threatened Miss 
Dunstable with a heartache; and now, when the time for their separation
came, he found that his own heart was the more likely to ache of the
two.

'I suppose I must say something to her, or my aunt will never be
satisfied,' said he to himself as he sauntered into the little
drawing-room on that last evening.  But at the very time he was ashamed
of himself, for he knew he was going to ask badly.

His sister and one of his cousins were in the room, but his aunt, who
was quite on the alert, soon got them out of it, and Frank and Miss
Dunstable were alone.

'So all our fun and all our laughter is come to an end,' said she,
beginning the conversation.  'I don't know how you feel, but for myself
I really am a little melancholy at the idea of parting;' and she looked
up at him with her laughing black eyes, as though she never had, and
never could have a care in the world.

'Melancholy! oh, yes; you look so,' said Frank, who really did feel
somewhat lackadaisically sentimental.

'But how thoroughly glad the countess must be that we are both going,'
continued she.  'I declare we have treated her most infamously.  Ever
since we've been here we've had the amusement to ourselves.  I've
sometimes thought she would turn me out of the house.'

'I wish with all my heart she had.'

'Oh, you cruel barbarian! why on earth should you wish that?'

'That I might have joined you in your exile.  I hate Courcy Castle, and
should have rejoiced to leave--and--and--'

'And what?'

'And I love Miss Dunstable, and should have doubly, trebly rejoiced to
leave it with her.'

Frank's voice quivered a little as he made this gallant profession; but
still Miss Dunstable only laughed the louder. 'Upon my word, of all my
knights you are by far the best behaved,' said she, 'and say much the
prettiest things.' Frank became rather red in the face, and felt that
he did so. Miss Dunstable was treating him like a boy.  While she 
pretended to be so fond of him she was only laughing at him, and
corresponding the while with his cousin George.  Now Frank Gresham
already entertained a sort of contempt for his cousin, which increased
the bitterness of his feelings.  Could it really be possible that
George had succeeded while he had utterly failed; that his stupid
cousin had touched the heart of the heiress while she was playing with
him as with a boy?

'Of all your knights!  Is that the way you talk to me when we are going
to part?  When was it, Miss Dunstable, that George de Courcy became one
of them?'

Miss Dunstable for a while looked serious enough.  'What makes you ask
that?' said she.  'What makes you inquire about Mr de Courcy?'

'Oh, I have eyes, you know, and can't help seeing.  Not that I see, or
have seen anything that I could possibly help.'

'And what have you seen, Mr Gresham?'

'Why, I know you have been writing to him.'

'Did he tell you so?'

'No; he did not tell me; but I know it.'

For a moment she sat silent, and then her face again resumed its usual
happy smile.  'Come, Mr Gresham, you are not going to quarrel with me,
I hope, even if I did write a letter to your cousin.  Why should I not
write to him?  I correspond with all manner of people.  I'll write to
you some of these days if you'll let me, and will promise to answer my 
letters.'

Frank threw himself back on the sofa on which he was sitting, and, in
doing so, brought himself somewhat nearer to his companion than he had
been; he then drew his hand slowly across his forehead, pushing back
his thick hair, and as he did so he sighed somewhat plaintively.

'I do not care,' said he, 'for the privilege of correspondence on such
terms.  If my cousin George is to be a correspondent of yours also, I
will give up my claim.'

And then he sighed again, so that it was piteous to hear him. He was
certainly an arrant puppy, and an egregious ass into the bargain; but
then, it must be remembered in his favour that he was only twenty-one,
and that much had been done to spoil him. Miss Dunstable did remember
this, and therefore abstained from laughing at him.

'Why, Mr Gresham, what on earth do you mean?  In all human probability
I shall never write another line to Mr de Courcy; but, if I did, what
possible harm could it do you?'

'Oh, Miss Dunstable! you do not in the least understand what my
feelings are.'

'Don't I?   Then I hope I never shall.  I thought I did.  I thought
they were the feelings of a good, true-hearted friend; feelings that I
could sometimes look back upon with pleasure as being honest when so
much that one meets is false.  I have become very fond of you, Mr
Gresham, and I should be sorry to think that I did not understand your 
feelings.'

This was almost worse and worse.  Young ladies like Miss Dunstable--for
she was still to be numbered in the category of young ladies--do not
usually tell young gentlemen that they are very fond of them.  To boys
and girls they may make such a declaration.  Now Frank Gresham regarded
himself as one who had already fought his battles, and fought them not
without glory; he could not therefore endure to be thus openly told by
Miss Dunstable that she was very fond of him.

'Fond of me, Miss Dunstable!  I wish you were.'

'So I am--very.'

'You little know how fond I am of you, Miss Dunstable,' and he put out
his hand to take hold of hers.  She then lifted up her own, and slapped
him lightly on the knuckles.

'And what can you have to say to say to Miss Dunstable that can make it
necessary that you should pinch her hand?  I tell you fairly, Mr
Gresham, if you make a fool of yourself, I shall come to a conclusion
that you are all fools, and that it is hopeless to look out for any one
worth caring for.'

Such advice as this, so kindly given, so wisely meant, so clearly
intelligible he should have taken and understood, young as he was.  but
even yet he did not do so.

'A fool of myself!  Yes; I suppose I must be a fool if I have so much
regard for Miss Dunstable as to make it painful for me to know that I
am to see her no more: a fool: yes, of course I am a fool--a man is
always a fool when he loves.'

Miss Dunstable could not pretend to doubt his meaning any longer; and
was determined to stop him, let it cost what it would.  She now put out
her hand, not over white, and, as Frank soon perceived, gifted with a
very fair allowance of strength.

'Now, Mr Gresham,' said she, 'before you go any further you shall
listen to me.  Will you listen to me for a moment without interrupting
me?'

Frank was of course obliged to promise that he would do so.

'You are going--or rather you were going, for I shall stop you--to make
a profession of love.'

'A profession!' said Frank making a slight unsuccessful effort to get
his hand free.

'Yes; a profession--a false profession, Mr Gresham,--a false profession--
a false profession.  Look into your heart--into your heart of hearts.  I
know you at any rate have a heart; look into it closely.  Mr Gresham,
you know you do not love me; not as a man should love the woman he
swears to love.'

Frank was taken aback.  So appealed to he found that he could not any
longer say that he did love her.  He could only look into her face with
all his eyes, and sit there listening to her.

'How is it possible that you should love me?  I am Heaven knows how
many years your senior.  I am neither young nor beautiful, nor have I
been brought up as she should be whom you in time will really love and
make your wife.  I have nothing that should make you love me; but--but I
am rich.'

'It is not that,' said Frank, stoutly, feeling himself imperatively
called upon to utter something in his own defence.

'Ah, Mr Gresham, I fear it is that.  For what other reason can you have
laid your plans to talk in this way to such a woman as I am?'

'I have laid no plans,' said Frank, now getting his hand to himself. 
'At any rate, you wrong me there, Miss Dunstable.'

'I like you so well--nay, love you, if a woman may talk of love in the
way of friendship--that if money, money alone would make you happy, you
should have it heaped on you.  If you want it, Mr Gresham, you shall
have it.'

'I have never thought of your money,' said Frank, surlily.

'But it grieves me,' continued she, 'it does grieve me, to think that
you, you, you--so young and gay, so bright--that you should have looked
for it in this way.  From others I have taken it just as the wind that
whistles;' and now two big slow tears escaped from her eyes, and would
have rolled down her rosy cheeks were it not that she brushed them off
with the back of her hand.

'You have utterly mistaken me, Miss Dunstable,' said Frank.

'If I have, I will humbly beg your pardon,' said she, 'but--but--but--'

Frank had nothing further to say in his own defence.  He had not wanted
Miss Dunstable's money--that was true; but he could not deny that he had
been about to talk that absolute nonsense of which she spoke with so
much scorn.

'You would almost make me think that there are none honest in this
fashionable world of yours.  I well know why Lady de Courcy has had me
here: how could I help knowing it?  She has been so foolish in her
plans that ten times a day she has told me her own secret.  But I have
said to myself twenty times, that if she were crafty, you were honest.'

'And am I dishonest?'

'I have laughed in my sleeve to see how she played her game, and to
hear others around playing theirs; all of them thinking that they could
get the money of the poor fool who had come at their beck and call; but
I was able to laugh at them as long as I thought that I had one true
friend to laugh with me.  But one cannot laugh with all the world
against one.'

'I am not against you, Miss Dunstable.'

'Sell yourself for money! why, if I were a man I would not sell one jot
of liberty for mountains of gold.  What! tie myself in the heyday of my
youth to a person I could never love, for a price! perjure myself,
destroy myself--and not only myself, but her also, in order that I might
live idly!  Oh, heavens!  Mr Gresham! can it be that the words of such
a woman as your aunt have sunk so deeply in your heart; have blackened
you so foully as this?  Have you forgotten your soul, your spirit, your
man's energy, the treasure of your heart?  And you, so young!  For
shame, Mr Gresham! for shame--for shame.'

Frank found the task before him by no means an easy one.  He had to
make Miss Dunstable understand that he had never had the slightest idea
of marrying her, and that he had made love to her merely with the
object of keeping his hand in for the work as it were; with that
object, and the other equally laudable one of interfering with his
cousin George.

And yet there was nothing for him but to get through this task as best
he might.  He was goaded to it by the accusations which Miss Dunstable
brought against him; and he began to feel, that though her invective
against him might be bitter when he had told the truth, they could not
be so bitter as those she now kept hinting at under her mistaken 
impression as to his views.  He had never had any strong propensity for
money-hunting; but now that offence appeared in his eyes abominable,
unmanly, and disgusting.  Any imputation would be better than that.

'Miss Dunstable, I never for a moment thought of doing what you accuse
me of; on my honour, I never did.  I have been very foolish--very
wrong--idiotic, I believe; but I have never intended that.'

'Then, Mr Gresham, what did you intend?'

This was rather a difficult question to answer; and Frank was not very
quick in attempting it.  'I know you will not forgive me,' he said at
last; 'and, indeed, I do not see how you can. I don't know how it came
about; but this is certain, Miss Dunstable; I have never for a moment
thought about your fortune; that is, thought about it in the way of
coveting it.'

'You never thought of making me your wife, then?'

'Never,' said Frank, looking boldly into her face.

'You never intended really to propose to go with me to the altar, and
then make yourself rich by one great perjury?'

'Never for a moment,' said he.

'You have never gloated over me as the bird of prey gloats over the
poor beast that is soon to become carrion beneath its claws?  You have
not counted me out as equal to so much land, and calculated on me as a
balance at your banker's?  Ah, Mr Gresham,' she continued, seeing that
he stared as though struck almost with awe by her strong language; 'you
little guess what a woman situated as I am has to suffer.'

'I have behaved badly to you, Miss Dunstable, and I beg your pardon;
but I have never thought of your money.'

'Then we will be friends again, Mr Gresham, won't we?  It is so nice to
have a friend like you.  There, I think I understand it now; you need
not tell me.'

'It was half by way of making a fool of my aunt,' said Frank, in an
apologetic tone.

'There is merit in that, at any rate,' said Miss Dunstable.  'I
understand it all now; you thought to make a fool of me in real
earnest.  Well, I can forgive that; at any rate it is not mean.'

It may be, that Miss Dunstable did not feel much acute anger at finding
that this young man had addressed her with words of love in the course
of an ordinary flirtation, although that flirtation had been unmeaning
and silly.  This was not the offence against which her heart and breast
had found peculiar cause to arm itself; this was not the injury from 
which she had hitherto experienced suffering.

At any rate, she and Frank again became friends, and, before the
evening was over, they perfectly understood each other.  Twice during
this long tete-a-tete Lady de Courcy came into the room to see how
things were going on, and twice she went out almost unnoticed.  It was
quite clear to her that something uncommon had taken place, was taking
place, or would take place; and that should this be for weal or for 
woe, no good could not come from her interference.  On each occasion,
therefore, she smiled sweetly on the pair of turtle-doves, and glided
out of the room as quietly as she had glided into it.

But at last it became necessary to remove them; for the world had gone
to bed.  Frank, in the meantime, had told to Miss Dunstable all his
love for Mary Thorne, and Miss Dunstable had enjoined him to be true to
his vows.  To her eyes there was something of heavenly beauty in young,
true love--of beauty that was heavenly because it had been unknown to
her.

'Mind you let me hear, Mr Gresham,' said she.  'Mind you do; and, Mr
Gresham, never, never forget her for one moment; not for one moment, Mr
Gresham.'

Frank was about to swear that he never would--again, when the countess,
for the third time, sailed into the room.

'Young people,' said she, 'do you know what o'clock it is?'

'Dear me, Lady de Courcy, I declare it is past twelve; I really am
ashamed of myself.  How glad you will be to get rid of me to-morrow!'

'No, no, indeed we shan't; shall we, Frank?' and so Miss Dunstable
passed out.

Then once again the aunt tapped her nephew with her fan.  It was the
last time in her life that she did so.  He looked up in her face, and
his look was enough to tell her that the acres of Greshamsbury were not
to be reclaimed by the ointment of Lebanon.

Nothing further on the subject was said.  On the following morning Miss
Dunstable took her departure, not much heeding the rather cold words of
farewell which her hostess gave her; and on the following day Frank
started for Greshamsbury.



CHAPTER XXI

MR MOFFAT FALLS INTO TROUBLE

We will now, with the reader's kind permission, skip over some months
in our narrative.  Frank returned from Courcy Castle to Greshamsbury,
and having communicated to his mother--much in the same manner as he had
to the countess--the fact that his mission had been unsuccessful, he
went up after a day or two to Cambridge.  During his short stay at 
Greshamsbury he did not even catch a glimpse of Mary.  He asked for
her, of course, and was told that it was not likely that she would be
at the house just at present.  He called at the doctor's, but she was
denied to him there; 'she was out,' Janet said,--'probably with Miss
Oriel.'  He went to the parsonage and found Miss Oriel at home; but
Mary had not been seen that morning.  He then returned to the house;
and, having come to the conclusion that she had not thus vanished into
air, otherwise than by preconcerted arrangement, he boldly taxed
Beatrice on the subject.

Beatrice looked very demure; declared that no one in the house had
quarrelled with Mary; confessed that it had been thought prudent that
she should for a while stay away from Greshamsbury; and, of course,
ended by telling her brother everything, including all the scenes that
had passed between Mary and herself.

'It is out of the question your thinking of marrying her, Frank,' said
she.  'You must know that nobody feels it more strongly than poor Mary
herself;' and Beatrice looked the very personification of domestic
prudence.

'I know nothing of the kind,' said he, with the headlong imperative air
that was usual with him in discussing matters with his sisters.  'I
know nothing of the kind.  Of course I cannot say what Mary's feelings
may be: a pretty life she must have had of it among you.  But you may
be sure of this, Beatrice, and so may my mother, that nothing on earth
shall make me give her up--nothing.'  And Frank, as he made this 
protestation, strengthened his own resolution by thinking of all the
counsel that Miss Dunstable had given him.

The brother and sister could hardly agree, as Beatrice was dead against
the match.  Not that she would not have liked Mary Thorne for a
sister-in-law, but that she shared to a certain degree the feeling
which was now common to all the Greshams--that Frank must marry money. 
It seemed, at any rate, to be imperative that he should either do that
or not marry at all.  Poor Beatrice was not very mercenary in her 
views: she had no wish to sacrifice her brother to any Miss Dunstable;
but yet she felt, as they all felt--Mary Thorne included--that such as a
match as that, of the young heir with the doctor's niece, was not to be
thought of;--not to be spoken of as a thing that was in any way
possible.  Therefore, Beatrice, though she was Mary's great friend, 
though she was her brother's favourite sister, could give Frank no
encouragement.  Poor Frank! circumstances had made but one bride
possible to him: he must marry money.

His mother said nothing to him on the subject: when she learnt that the
affair with Miss Dunstable was not to come off, she merely remarked
that it would perhaps be best for him to return to Cambridge as soon as
possible.  Had she spoken her mind out, she would probably have also
advised him to remain there as long as possible.  The countess had not 
omitted to write to her when Frank had left Courcy Castle; and the
countess's letter certainly made the anxious mother think that her
son's education had hardly yet been completed. With this secondary
object, but with that of keeping him out of the way of Mary Thorne in
the first place, Lady Arabella was now quite satisfied that her son
should enjoy such advantages as an education completed at the
university might give him.

With his father Frank had a long conversation; but, alas!  the gist of
his father's conversation was this, that it behoved him, Frank, to
marry money.  The father, however, did not put it to him in the cold,
callous way in which his lady-aunt had done, and his lady-mother.  He
did not bid him go and sell himself to the first female he could find
possessed of wealth. It was with inward self-reproaches, and true grief
of spirit, that the father told the son that it was not possible for
him to do as those who may do who are born really rich, or really poor.

'If you marry a girl without a fortune, Frank, how are you to live?'
the father asked, after having confessed how deep he himself had
injured his own heir.

'I don't care about money, sir,' said Frank.  'I shall be just as happy
if Boxall Hill had never been sold.  I don't care a straw about that
sort of thing.'

'Ah!  my boy; but you will care: you will soon find that you do care.'

'Let me go into some profession.  Let me go to the Bar.  I am sure I
could earn my own living.  Earn it!  of course I could, why not I as
well as others?  I should like of all things to be a barrister.'

There was much more of the same kind, in which Frank said all that he
could think of to lessen his father's regrets.  In their conversation
not a word was spoken about Mary Thorne.  Frank was not aware whether
or no his father had been told of the great family danger which was
dreaded in that quarter.  That he had been told, we may surmise, as
Lady Arabella was not wont to confine the family dangers to her own
bosom.  Moreover, Mary's presence had, of course, been missed.  The 
truth was, that the squire had been told, with great bitterness, of
what had come to pass, and all the evil had been laid at his door. He
it had been who hand encouraged Mary to be regarded almost as a
daughter of the house of Greshamsbury: he it was who taught that odious
doctor--odious on all but his aptitude for good doctoring--to think
himself a fit match for the aristocracy of the county.  It had been his
fault, this great necessity that Frank should marry money; and now it
was his fault that Frank was absolutely talking of marrying a pauper.

By no means in quiescence did the squire hear these charges brought
against him.  The Lady Arabella, in each attack, got quite as much as
she gave, and, at last, was driven to retreat in a state of headache,
which she declared to be chronic; and which, so she assured her
daughter Augusta, must prevent her from having any more lengthened
conversations with her lord--at any rate for the next three months.  But
though the squire may be said to have come off on the whole as the
victor in these combats, they did not perhaps have, on that account,
the less effect upon him.  He knew it was true that he had done much
towards ruining his son; and he also could think of no other remedy
than matrimony.  It was Frank's doom, pronounced even by the voice of
his father, that he must marry money.

And so, Frank went off again to Cambridge, feeling himself, as he went,
to be a much lesser man in Greshamsbury estimation than he had been
some two months earlier, when his birthday had been celebrated.  Once
during his short stay at Greshamsbury he had seen the doctor; but the
meeting had been anything but pleasant.  He had been afraid to ask
after Mary; and the doctor had been too diffident of himself to speak
of her.  They had met casually on the road, and, though each in his
heart loved the other, the meeting had been anything but pleasant.

And so Frank went to Cambridge; and, as he did so, he stoutly resolved
that nothing should make him untrue to Mary Thorne. 'Beatrice,' said
he, on the morning he went away, when she came into his room to
superintend his packing--'Beatrice, if she ever talks about me--'

'Oh, Frank, my darling Frank, don't think of it--it is madness; she
knows it is madness.'

'Never mind; if she ever talks about me, tell her that the last word I
said was, that I would never forget her.  She can do as she likes.'

Beatrice made no promise, never hinted that she would give the message;
but it may be taken for granted that she had not been long in company
with Mary Thorne before she did give it.

And then there were other troubles at Greshamsbury.  It had been
decided that Augusta's marriage was to take place in September; but Mr
Moffat had, unfortunately, been obliged to postpone the happy day.  He
himself had told Augusta--not, of course, without protestations as to
his regret--and had written to this effect to Mr Gresham,
'Electioneering matters, and other troubles had,' he said, 'made this 
peculiarly painful postponement absolutely necessary.'

Augusta seemed to bear her misfortune with more equanimity than is, we
believe, usual with young ladies under such circumstances.  She spoke
of it to her mother in a very matter-of-fact way, and seemed almost
contented at the idea of remaining at Greshamsbury till February; which
was the time now named for the marriage.  But Lady Arabella was not 
equally well satisfied, nor was the squire.

'I half believe that fellow is not honest,' he had once said out loud
before Frank, and this set Frank a-thinking of what dishonesty in the
matter it was probable that Mr Moffat might be guilty, and what would
be the fitting punishment for such a crime.  Nor did he think on the
subject in vain; especially after a conference on the matter which he
had with his friend Harry Baker.  This conference took place during the
Christmas vacation.

It should be mentioned, that the time spent by Frank at Courcy Castle
had not done much to assist him in his views as to an early degree, and
that it had at last been settled that he should stay up at Cambridge
another year.  When he came home at Christmas he found that the house
was not peculiarly lively.  Mary was absent on a visit with Miss
Oriel.  Both these young ladies were staying with Miss Oriel's aunt, in
the neighbourhood of London; and Frank soon learnt that there was no
chance that either of them would be home before his return. No message
had been left for him by Mary--none at least had been left with
Beatrice; and he began in his heart to accuse her of coldness and
perfidy;--not, certainly, with much justice, seeing that she had never
given him the slightest encouragement.

The absence of Patience Oriel added to the dullness of the place.  It
was certainly hard upon Frank that all the attraction of the village
should be removed to make way and prepare for his return--harder,
perhaps, on them; for, to tell the truth, Miss Oriel's visit had been
entirely planned to enable her to give Mary a comfortable way of
leaving Greshamsbury during the time that Frank should remain at home.
Frank thought himself cruelly used.  But what did Mr Oriel think when
doomed to eat his Christmas pudding alone, because the young squire
would be unreasonable in his love?  What did the doctor think, as he
sat solitary by his deserted hearth--the doctor, who no longer permitted
himself to enjoy the comforts of the Greshamsbury dining-table?  Frank
hinted and grumbled; talked to Beatrice of the determined constancy of
his love, and occasionally consoled himself by a stray smile from some
of the neighbouring belles.  The black horse was made perfect; the old
grey pony was by no means discarded; and much that was satisfactory was
done in the sporting line.  But still the house was dull, and Frank
felt that he was the cause of its being so.  Of the doctor he saw but
little: he never came to Greshamsbury, unless to see Lady Arabella as
doctor, or to be closeted with the squire.  There were no special
evenings with him; no animated confabulations at the doctor's house; no
discourses between them, as there was wont to be, about the merits of
the different covers, and the capacities of the different hounds. These
were dull days on the whole for Frank; and sad enough, we may say, for
our friend the doctor.

In February Frank again went back to college; having settled with Harry
Baker certain affairs which weighed on his mind.  He went back to
Cambridge, promising to be home on the twentieth of the month, so as to
be present at his sister's wedding.  A cold and chilling time had been
named for these hymeneal joys, but one not altogether unsuited to the 
feelings of the happy pair.  February is certainly not a warm month;
but with the rich it is generally a cosy, comfortable time.  Good
fires, winter cheer, groaning tables, and warm blankets, make a
fictitious summer, which, to some tastes, is more delightful than the
long days and the hot sun.  And some marriages are especially winter
matches.  They depend for their charm on the same substantial
attractions: instead of heart beating to heart in sympathetic unison,
purse chinks to purse.  The rich new furniture of the new abode is
looked to instead of the rapture of a pure embrace.  The new carriage 
is depended on rather than the new heart's companion; and the first
bright gloss, prepared by the upholsterer's hands, stands in lieu of
the rosy tints which young love lends to his true votaries.

Mr Moffat had not spent his Christmas at Greshamsbury.  That eternal
election petition, those eternal lawyers, the eternal care of his
well-managed wealth, forbade him the enjoyment of any such pleasures. 
He could not come to Greshamsbury for Christmas, nor yet for the
festivities of the new year; but now and then he wrote prettily worded
notes, sending occasionally a silver-gilt pencil-case, or a small
brooch, and informed Lady Arabella that he looked forward to the 
twentieth of February with great satisfaction.  But, in the meanwhile,
the squire became anxious, and at last went up to London; and Frank,
who was at Cambridge, bought the heaviest-cutting whip to be found in
that town, and wrote a confidential letter to Harry Baker.

Poor Mr Moffat!  It is well known that none but the brave deserve the
fair; but thou, without much excuse for bravery, had secured for
thyself one who, at any rate, was fair enough for thee.  Would it not
have been well hadst thou looked to thyself to see what real bravery
might be in thee, before thou hadst prepared to desert this fair one
thou hadst already won? That last achievement, one may say, did require
some special courage.

Poor Mr Moffat!  It is wonderful that as he sat in that gig, going to
Gatherum Castle, planning how he would be off with Miss Gresham and
afterwards on with Miss Dunstable, it is wonderful that he should not
then have cast his eye behind him, and looked at that stalwart pair of
shoulders which were so close to his own back.  As he afterwards
pondered on his scheme while sipping the duke's claret, it is odd that
he should not have observed the fiery pride of purpose and power of
wrath which was so plainly written on that young man's brow: or, when
he matured, and finished, and carried out his purpose, that he did not
think of that keen grasp which had already squeezed his own hand with
somewhat too warm a vigour, even in the way of friendship.

Poor Mr Moffat! it is probable that he forgot to think of Frank at all
as connected with his promised bride; it is probable that he looked
forward only to the squire's violence and the enmity of the house of
Courcy; and that he found from enquiry at his heart's pulses, that he
was man enough to meet these.  Could he have guessed what a whip Frank
Gresham would have bought at Cambridge--could he have divined what a
letter would have been written to Harry Baker--it is probable, nay, we
think we may say certain, that Miss Gresham would have become Mrs
Moffat.

Miss Gresham, however, never did become Mrs Moffat.  About two days
after Frank's departure for Cambridge--it is just possible that Mr
Moffat was so prudent as to make himself aware of the fact--but just two
days after Frank's departure, a very long, elaborate, and clearly
explanatory letter was received at Greshamsbury.  Mr Moffat was quite
sure that Miss Gresham and her very excellent parents would do him the 
justice to believe that he was not actuated, &c, &c, &c.  The long and
the short of this was, that Mr Moffat signified his intention of
breaking off the match without offering any intelligible reason.

Augusta again bore her disappointment well: not, indeed, without sorrow
and heartache, and inward, hidden tears; but still well.  She neither
raved, nor fainted, nor walked about by moonlight alone.  She wrote no
poetry, and never once thought of suicide.  When, indeed, she
remembered the rosy-tinted lining, the unfathomable softness of that
Long-acre carriage, her spirit did for one moment give way; but, on the
whole, she bore it as a strong-minded woman and a De Courcy should do.

But both Lady Arabella and the squire were greatly vexed.  The former
had made the match, and the latter, having consented to it, had
incurred deeper responsibilities to enable him to bring it about.  The
money which was to have been given to Mr Moffat was still to the fore;
but alas! how much, how much that he could ill spare, had been thrown
away in bridal preparations!  It is, moreover, an unpleasant thing for
a gentleman to have his daughter jilted; perhaps peculiarly so to have
her jilted by a tailor's son.

Lady Arabella's woe was really piteous.  It seemed to her as though
cruel fate were heaping misery after misery upon the wretched house of
Greshamsbury.  A few weeks since things were going so well with her! 
Frank then was still all but the accepted husband of almost untold
wealth--so, at least, she was informed by her sister-in-law--whereas,
Augusta, was the accepted wife of wealth, not indeed untold, but of 
dimensions quite sufficiently respectable to cause much joy in the
telling.  Where now were her golden hopes?  Where now the splendid
future of her poor duped children?  Augusta was left to pine alone; and
Frank, in a still worse plight, insisted on maintaining his love for a
bastard and a pauper.

For Frank's affairs she had received some poor consolation by laying
all the blame on the squire's shoulders.  What she had then said was
now repaid to her with interest; for not only had she been the maker of
Augusta's match, but she had boasted of the deed with all a mother's
pride.

It was from Beatrice that Frank had obtained his tidings.  This last
resolve on the part of Mr Moffat had not altogether been unsuspected by
some of the Greshams, though altogether unsuspected by the Lady
Arabella.  Frank had spoken of it as a possibility to Beatrice, and was
not quite unprepared when the information reached him.  He consequently
bought his cutting-whip, and wrote his confidential letter to Harry 
Baker.

On the following day Frank and Harry might have been seen, with their
heads nearly close together, leaning over one of the tables in the
large breakfast-room at the Tavistock Hotel in Covent Garden.  The
ominous whip, to the handle of which Frank had already made his hand
well accustomed, was lying on the table between them; and ever and anon
Harry Baker would take it up and feel its weight approvingly.  Oh, Mr
Moffat! poor Mr Moffat! go not out into the fashionable world to-day; 
above all, go not to that club of thine in Pall Mall; but, oh!
especially go not there, as is thy wont to do, at three o'clock in the
afternoon!

With much care did those two young generals lay their plans of attack. 
Let it not for a moment be thought that it was ever in the minds of
either of them that two men should attack one.  But it was thought that
Mr Moffat might be rather coy in coming out from his seclusion to meet
the proffered hand of his once intended brother-in-law when he should
see that hand armed with a heavy whip.  Baker, therefore, was content
to act as a decoy duck, and remarked that he might no doubt make
himself useful in restraining the public mercy, and, probably, in
controlling the interference of policemen.

'It will be deuced hard if I can't get five or six shies at him,' said
Frank, again clutching his weapon almost spasmodically.  Oh, Mr
Moffat!  five or six shies with such a whip, and such an arm!  For
myself, I would sooner join the second Balaclava gallop than encounter
it.

At ten minutes before four these two heroes might be seen walking up
Pall Mall, towards the --- Club.  Young Baker walked with an eager
disengaged air.  Mr Moffat did not know his appearance; he had,
therefore, no anxiety to pass along unnoticed.  But Frank had in some
mysterious way drawn his hat very far over his forehead, and had
buttoned his shooting-coat up round his chin.  Harry had recommended to
him a great-coat, in order that he might the better conceal his face;
but Frank had found the great-coat was an encumbrance to his arm.  He
put it on, and when thus clothed he had tried the whip, he found that
he cut the air with much less potency than in the lighter garment.  He
contented himself, therefore, with looking down on the pavement as he 
walked along, letting the long point of the whip stick up from his
pocket, and flattering himself that even Mr Moffat would not recognise
him at the first glance.  Poor Mr Moffat! If he had but had the
chance!

And now, having arrived at the front of the club, the two friends for a
moment separate: Frank remains standing on the pavement, under the
shade of the high stone area-railing, while Harry jauntily skips up
three steps at a time, and with a very civil word of inquiry of the
hall porter, sends his card to Mr Moffat--

'MR HARRY BAKER'

Mr Moffat, never having heard of such a gentleman in his life,
unwittingly comes out into the hall, and Harry, with the sweetest
smile, addresses him.

Now the plan of the campaign had been settled in this wise: Baker was
to send into the club for Mr Moffat, and invite that gentleman down
into the street.  It was probable that the invitation might be
declined; and it had been calculated in such case the two gentlemen
would retire for parley into the strangers' room, which was known to be
immediately opposite the hall door.  Frank was to keep his eye on the 
portals, and if he found that Mr Moffat did not appear as readily as
might be desired, he also was to ascend the steps and hurry into the
strangers' room.  Then, whether he met Mr Moffat there or elsewhere, or
wherever, he might meet him, he was to greet him with all the friendly
vigour in his power, while Harry disposed of the club porters.

But fortune, who ever favours the brave, specially favoured Frank
Gresham on this occasion. Just as Harry Baker had put his card into the
servant's hand, Mr Moffat, with his hat on, prepared for the street,
appeared in the hall; Mr Baker addressed him with his sweetest smile,
and begged the pleasure of saying a word or two as they descended into
the street. Had not Mr Moffat been going thither it would have been very
improbable that he should have done so at Harry's instance. But, as it
was, he merely looked rather solemn at his visitor--it was his wont to
look solemn--and continued the descent of the steps.

Frank, his heart leaping the while, saw his prey, and retreated two
steps behind the area-railing, the dread weapon already well poised in
his hand.  Oh!  Mr Moffat!  Mr Moffat! if there be any goddess to
interfere in thy favour, let her come forward now without delay; let
her now bear thee off on a cloud if there be one to whom thou art
sufficiently dear!  But there is no such goddess.

Harry smiled blandly till they were well on the pavement, saying some
nothing, and keeping the victim's face averted from the avenging angel;
and then, when the raised hand was sufficiently nigh, he withdrew two
steps towards the nearest lamp-post.  Not for him was the honour of the
interview;--unless, indeed, succouring policemen might give occasion
for some gleam of glory.

But succouring policemen were no more to be come by than goddesses. 
Where were ye, men, when that savage whip fell about the ears of the
poor ex-legislator?  In Scotland Yard, sitting dozing on your benches,
or talking soft nothings to the housemaids round the corner; for ye
were not walking on your beats, nor standing at coign of vantage, to
watch the tumults of the day.  Had Sir Richard himself been on the spot
Frank Gresham would still, we may say, have had his five shies at that
unfortunate one.

When Harry Baker quickly seceded from the way, Mr Moffat at once saw
the fate before him.  His hair doubtless stood on end, and his voice
refused to give the loud screech with which he sought to invoke the
club.  An ashy paleness suffused his cheeks, and his tottering steps
were unable to bear him away in flight.  Once, and twice, the cutting
whip came well down across his back.  Had he been wise enough to stand
still and take his thrashing in that attitude, it would have been well
for him.  But men so circumstanced have never such prudence.  After two
blows he made a dash at the steps, thinking to get back into the club;
but Harry, who had by no means reclined in idleness against the
lamp-post, here stopped him: 'You had better go back into the street,'
said Harry; 'indeed you had,' giving him a shove from off the second
step.

Then of course Frank could do no other than hit him anywhere. When a
gentleman is dancing about with much energy it is hardly possible to
strike him fairly on his back.  The blows, therefore, came now on his
legs and now on his head; and Frank unfortunately got more than his
five or six shies before he was interrupted.

The interruption however came, all too soon for Frank's idea of
justice.  Though there be no policeman to take part in a London row,
there are always others ready enough to do so; amateur policemen, who
generally sympathize with the wrong side, and, in nine cases out of
ten, expend their generous energy in protecting thieves and
pickpockets.  When it was seen with what tremendous ardour that dread
weapon fell about the ears of the poor undefended gentleman,
interference was at last, in spite of Harry Baker's best endeavours,
and loudest protestations.

'Do not interrupt them, sir,' said he; 'pray do not.  It is a family
affair, and they will neither of them like it.'

In the teeth, however, of these assurances, rude people did interfere,
and after some nine or ten shies Frank found himself encompassed by the
arms, and encumbered by the weight of a very stout gentleman, who hung
affectionately about his neck and shoulders; whereas, Mr Moffat was
already sitting in a state of syncope on the good-natured knees of a 
fishmonger's apprentice.

Frank was thoroughly out of breath: nothing came from his lips but
half-muttered expletives and unintelligible denunciations of the
iniquity of his foe.  But still he struggled to be at him again.  We
all know how dangerous is the taste of blood; now cruelly it will
become a custom even with the most tender-hearted.  Frank felt that he
had hardly fleshed his virgin lash: he thought, almost with despair, 
that he had not yet at all succeeded as became a man and a brother; his
memory told him of but one or two of the slightest touches that had
gone well home to the offender.  He made a desperate effort to throw
off that incubus round his neck and rush again to the combat.

'Harry--Harry; don't let him go--don't let him go,' he barely 
articulated.

'Do you want to murder the man, sir; to murder him?' said the stout
gentleman over his shoulder, speaking solemnly into his very ear.

'I don't care,' said Frank, struggling manfully but uselessly. 'Let me
out, I say; I don't care--don't let him go, Harry, whatever you do.'

'He has got it prettily tidily,' said Harry; 'I think that will perhaps
do for the present.'

By this time there was a considerable concourse.  The club steps were
crowded with members; among whom there were may of Mr Moffat's
acquaintance.  Policemen now flocked up, and the question arose as to
what should be done with the originators of the affray.  Frank and
Harry found that they were to consider themselves under a gentle
arrest, and Mr Moffat, in a fainting state, was carried into the
interior of the club.

Frank, in his innocence, had intended to have celebrated this little
affair when it was over by a light repast and a bottle of claret with
his friend, and then to have gone back to Cambridge by the mail train. 
He found, however, that his schemes in this respect were frustrated. He
had to get bail to attend at Marlborough Street police-office should he
be wanted within the next two or three days; and was given to 
understand that he would be under the eye of the police, at any rate
until Mr Moffat should be out of danger.

'Out of danger!' said Frank to his friend with a startled look. 'Why I
hardly got at him.'  Nevertheless, they did have their slight repast,
and also their bottle of claret.

On the second morning after this occurrence, Frank was again sitting in
that public room at the Tavistock, and Harry was again sitting opposite
to him.  The whip was not now so conspicuously produced between them,
having been carefully packed up and put away among Frank's other
travelling properties.  They were so sitting, rather glum, when the
door swung open, and a heavy quick step was heard advancing towards
them.  It was the squire; whose arrival there had been momentarily
expected.

'Frank,' said he--'Frank, what on earth is all this?' and as he spoke he
stretched out both hands, the right to his son and the left to his
friend.

'He has given a blackguard a licking, that is all,' said Harry.

Frank felt that his hand was held with a peculiarly warm grasp; and he
could not but think that his father's face, raised though his eyebrows
were--though there was on it an intended expression of amazement and,
perhaps, regret--nevertheless he could not but think that his father's
face looked kindly at him.

'God bless my soul, my dear boy! what have you done to the man?'

'He's not a ha'porth the worse, sir,' said Frank, still holding his
father's hand.

'Oh, isn't he!' said Harry, shrugging his shoulders.  'He must be made
of some very strong article then.'

'But my dear boys, I hope there's no danger.  I hope there's no
danger.'

'Danger!' said Frank, who could not yet induce himself to believe that
he had been allowed a fair chance with Mr Moffat.

'Oh, Frank!  Frank! how could you be so rash?  In the middle of Pall
Mall, too.  Well! well! well!   All the women down at Greshamsbury will
have it that you have killed him.'

'I almost wish I had,' said Frank.

'Oh, Frank! Frank!  But now tell me--'

And then the father sat well pleased while he heard, chiefly from Harry
Baker, the full story of his son's prowess.  And then they did not
separate without another slight repast and another bottle of claret.

Mr Moffat retired to the country for a while, and then went abroad;
having doubtless learnt that the petition was not likely to give him a
seat for the city of Barchester.  And this was the end of the wooing
with Miss Gresham.



CHAPTER XXII

SIR ROGER IS UNSEATED

After this, little occurred at Greshamsbury, or among Greshamsbury
people, which it will be necessary for us to record.  Some notice was,
of course, taking of Frank's prolonged a