bsence from his college; and
tidings, perhaps exaggerated tidings, of what had happened at Pall Mall
were not slow to reach the High Street of Cambridge.  But that affair
was gradually hushed up; and Frank went on with his studies.

He went back to his studies: it then being an understood arrangement
between him and his father that he should not return to Greshamsbury
till the summer vacation.  On this occasion, the squire and Lady
Arabella had, strange to say, been of the same mind.  They both wished
to keep their son away from Miss Thorne; and both calculated, that at
his age and with his disposition, it was not probable that any passion
would last out a six month absence.  'And when that summer comes it
will be an excellent opportunity for us to go abroad,' said Lady
Arabella.  'Poor Augusta will require some change to renovate her
spirits.'

To this last proposition the squire did not assent.  It was, however,
allowed to pass over; and this much was fixed, that Frank was not to
return till midsummer.

It will be remembered that Sir Roger Scatcherd had been elected as
sitting member for the city of Barchester; but it will also be
remembered that a petition against his return was threatened.  Had the
petition depended solely on Mr Moffat, Sir Roger's seat no doubt would
have been saved by Frank Gresham's cutting whip.  But such was not the
case.  Mr Moffat had been put forward by the De Courcy interest; and 
that noble family with its dependants was not to go to the wall because
Mr Moffat had had a thrashing.  No; the petition was to go on; and Mr
Nearthewinde declared, that no petition in his hands had half so good a
chance of success.  'Chance, no, but certainty,' said Mr Nearthewinde;
for Mr Nearthewinde had learnt something with reference to that honest
publican and the payment of his little bill.

The petition was presented and duly backed; the recognisances were
signed, and all the proper formalities formally executed; and Sir Roger
found that his seat was in jeopardy. His return had been a great
triumph to him; and, unfortunately, he had celebrated that triumph as
he had been in the habit of celebrating most of the very triumphant 
occasions of his life. Though he was than hardly yet recovered from the
effects of his last attack, he indulged in another violent drinking
bout; and, strange to say, did so without any immediate visible bad
effects.

In February he took his seat amidst the warm congratulations of all men
of his own class, and early in the month of April his case came on for
trial.  Every kind of electioneering sin known to the electioneering
world was brought to his charge; he was accused of falseness,
dishonesty, and bribery of every sort: he had, it was said in the paper
of indictment, bought votes, obtained them by treating, carried them
off by violence, conquered them by strong drink, polled them twice 
over, counted those of dead men, stolen them, forged them, and created
them by every possible, fictitious contrivance: there was no
description of wickedness appertaining to the task of procuring votes
of which Sir Roger had not been guilty, either by himself or by his
agents.  He was quite horror-struck at the list of his own enormities. 
But he was somewhat comforted when Mr Closerstil told him that the 
meaning of it all was that Mr Romer, the barrister, had paid a former
bill due to Mr Reddypalm, the publican.

'I fear he was indiscreet, Sir Roger; I really fear he was.  Those
young mean always are.  Being energetic, they work like horses; but
what's the use of energy without discretion, Sir Roger?'

'But, Mr Closerstil, I knew nothing of it from first to last.'

'The agency can be proved, Sir Roger,' said Mr Closerstil, shaking his
head.  And then there was nothing further to be said on the matter.

In these days of snow-white purity all political delinquency is
abominable in the eyes of British politicians; but no delinquency is so
abominable than the venality at elections. The sin of bribery is
damnable.  It is the one sin for which, in the House of Commons, there
can be no forgiveness. When discovered, it should render the culprit
liable to political death, without hope of pardon.  It is treason 
against a higher throne than that on which the Queen sits.  It is a
heresy which requires an auto-da-fe.  It is a pollution to the whole
House, which can only be cleansed by a great sacrifice.  Anathema
maranatha! out with it from amongst us, even though half of our heart's
blood be poured from the conflict!  Out with it, and for ever!

Such is the language of patriotic members with regard to bribery; and
doubtless, if sincere, they are in the right.  It is a bad thing,
certainly, that a rich man should buy votes; bad also that a poor man
should sell them.  By all means let us repudiate such a system with
heartfelt disgust.

With heartfelt disgust, if we can do so, by all means; but not with
disgust pretended only and not felt in the heart at all. The laws
against bribery at elections are now so stringent that an unfortunate
candidate may easily become guilty, even though actuated by the purest
intentions.  But not the less on that account does any gentleman,
ambitious of the honour of serving his country in Parliament, think it 
necessary as a preliminary measure to provide a round sum of money at
his banker's.  A candidate must pay for no treating, no refreshments,
no band of music; he must give neither ribbons to the girls nor ale to
the men.  If a huzza be uttered in his favour, it is at his peril; it
may be necessary for him to prove before a committee that it was the 
spontaneous result of British feeling in his favour, and not the
purchased result of British beer.  He cannot safely ask any one to
share his hotel dinner.  Bribery hides itself now in the most
impalpable shapes, and may be effected by the offer of a glass of
sherry.  But not the less on this account does a poor man find that he
is quite unable to overcome the difficulties of a contested election.

We strain at our gnats with a vengeance, but we swallow our camels with
ease.  For what purpose is it that we employ those peculiarly safe men
of business--Messrs Nearthewinde and Closerstil--when we wish to win our
path through all obstacles into that sacred recess?  Alas! the money is
still necessary, is still prepared, or at any rate, expended.  The poor
candidate of course knows nothing of the matter till the attorney's
bill is laid before him, when all danger of petitions has passed away. 
He little dreamed till then, not he, that there had been banquetings
and junketings, secret doings and deep drinkings at his expense.  Poor
candidate!  Poor member!  Who was so ignorant as he!  'Tis true he has 
paid bills before; but 'tis equally true that he specially begged his
managing friend Mr Nearthewinde, to be very careful that all was done
according to law!  He pays the bill, however, and on the next election
will again employ Mr Nearthewinde.

Now and again, at rare intervals, some glimpse into the inner sanctuary
does reach the eyes of ordinary mortal men without; some slight
accidental peep into those mysteries from when all corruption has been
so thoroughly expelled; and then, how delightfully refreshing is the
sight, when, perhaps, some ex-member, hurled from his paradise like a
fallen peri, reveals the secret of that pure heaven, and, in the agony
of his despair, tells us all that it cost him to sit for--through those
few halcyon years!

But Mr Nearthewinde is a safe man, and easy to be employed with but
little danger.  All these stringent bribery laws only enhance the value
of such very safe men as Mr Nearthewinde.  To him, stringent laws
against bribery are the strongest assurance of valuable employment. 
Were these laws of a nature to be evaded with ease, any indifferent
attorney might manage a candidate's affairs and enable him to take his 
seat with security.

It would have been well for Sir Roger if he had trusted solely to Mr
Closerstil; well also for Mr Romer had he never fished in those
troubled waters.  In due process of time the hearing of the petition
came on, and then who so happy, sitting at his ease in the London inn,
blowing his cloud from a long pipe, with measureless content, as Mr
Reddypalm?  Mr Reddypalm was the one great man of the contest.  All
depended on Mr Reddypalm; and well he did his duty.

The result of the petition was declared by the committee to be read as
follows:--that Sir Roger's election was null and void--that Sir Roger
had, by his agent, been guilty of bribery in obtaining a vote, by the
payment of a bill alleged to have been previously refused payment--this
is always a matter of course;--but that Sir Roger's agent, Mr Romer, had
been willingly guilty of bribery with reference to the transaction above
declared. Poor Sir Roger! Poor Mr Romer.

Poor Mr Romer indeed!  His fate was perhaps as sad as well might be,
and as foul a blot to the purism of these very pure times in which we
live.  Not long after those days, it so happening that some
considerable amount of youthful energy and quidnunc ability were
required to set litigation afloat at Hong Kong, Mr Romer was sent
thither as the fittest man for such work, with rich assurance of future
guerdon.  Who are so happy then as Mr Romer!  But even among the pure
there is room for envy and detraction.  Mr Romer had not yet ceased to
wonder at new worlds, as he skimmed among the islands of that southern
ocean, before the edict had gone forth for his return.  There were men
sitting in that huge court of Parliament on whose breasts it lay as an
intolerable burden, that England should be represented among the
antipodes by one who had tampered with the purity of the franchise. For
them there was no rest till this great disgrace should be wiped out and
atoned for.  Men they were of that calibre, that the slightest
reflection on them of such a stigma seemed to themselves to blacken
their own character.  They could not break bread with satisfaction till
Mr Romer was recalled.  He was recalled, and of course ruined--and the
minds of those just men were then at peace.

To any honourable gentleman who really felt his brow suffused with a
patriotic blush, as he thought of his country dishonoured by Mr Romer's
presence at Hong Kong--to any such gentleman, if any such there were,
let all honour be given, even though the intensity of his purity may
create amazement to our less finely organized souls.  But if no such
blush suffused the brow of any honourable gentleman; if Mr Romer was
recalled from quite other feelings--what then in lieu of honour shall we
allot to those honourable gentlemen who were most concerned?

Sir Roger, however, lost his seat, and, after three months of the joys
of legislation, found himself reduced by a terrible blow to the low
level of private life.

And the blow to him was very heavy.  Men but seldom tell the truth of
what is in them, even to their dearest friends; they are ashamed of
having feelings, or rather of showing that they are troubled by any
intensity of feeling.  It is the practice of the time to treat all
pursuits as though they were only half important to us, as though in
what we desire we were only half in earnest.  To be visibly eager seems
childish, and is always bad policy; and men, therefore, nowadays,
though they strive as hard as ever in the service of ambition--harder
than ever in that of mammon--usually do so with a pleasant smile on, as
though after all they were but amusing themselves with the little
matter in hand.

Perhaps it had been so with Sir Roger in those electioneering days when
he was looking for votes.  At any rate, he had spoken of his seat in
Parliament as but a doubtful good.  'He was willing, indeed, to stand,
having been asked; but the thing would interfere wonderfully with his
business; and then, what did he know about Parliament?  Nothing on
earth: it was the maddest scheme, but nevertheless, he was not going to
hang back when called upon--he had always been rough and ready when
wanted--and there he was now ready as ever, and rough enough too, God
knows.'

'Twas thus that he had spoken of his coming parliamentary honours; and
men had generally taken him at his word.  He had been returned, and
this success had been hailed as a great thing for the cause and class
to which he belonged.  But men did not know that his inner heart will
swelling with triumph, and that his bosom could hardly contain his
pride as he reflected that the poor Barchester stone-mason was now the 
representative of his native city.  And so, when his seat was attacked,
he still laughed and joked.  'They were welcome to it for him,' he
said; 'he could keep it or want it; and of the two, perhaps, the want
of it would come most convenient to him. He did not exactly think that
he had bribed any one; but if the bigwigs chose to say so, it was all
one to him.  He was rough and ready, now as ever,' &c &c.

But when the struggle came, it was to him a fearful one; not the less
fearful because there was no one, no, not one friend in all the world,
to whom he could open his mind and speak out honestly what was in his
heart.  To Dr Thorne he might perhaps have done so had his intercourse
with the doctor been sufficiently frequent; but it was only now and
then when he was ill, or when the squire wanted to borrow money, that
he saw Dr Thorne.  He had plenty of friends, heaps of friends in the
parliamentary sense; friends who talked about him, and lauded him at
public meetings; who shook hands with him on platforms and drank his
health at dinners; but he had no friends who could sit with him over
his own hearth, in true friendship, and listen to, and sympathize with,
and moderate the sighings of the inner man.  For him there was no 
sympathy; no tenderness of love; no retreat, save into himself, from
the loud brass band of the outer world.

The blow hit him terribly hard.  It did not come altogether 
unexpectedly, and yet, when it did come, it was all but unendurable. He
had made so much of the power of walking into that august chamber, and
sitting shoulder to shoulder in legislative equality with the sons of
dukes and the curled darlings of the nation.  Money had given him
nothing, nothing but the mere feeling of brute power: with his three
hundred thousand pounds he had felt himself to be no more palpably near
to the goal of his ambition than when he had chipped stones for three
shillings and sixpence a day.  But when he was led up and introduced at
that table, when he shook the old premier's hand on the floor of the
House of Commons, when he heard the honourable member for Barchester
alluded to in grave debate as the greatest living authority on railway 
matters, then, indeed, he felt that he had achieved something.

And now this cup was ravished from his lips, almost before it was
tasted.  When he was first told as a certainty that the decision of the
committee was against him, he bore up against the misfortune like a
man.  He laughed heartily, and declared himself well rid of a very
profitless profession; cut some little joke about Mr Moffat and his
thrashing, and left on those around him an impression that he was a man
so constituted, so strong in his own resolves, so steadily pursuant of
his own work, that no little contentions of this kind could affect
him.  Men admired his easy laughter, as, shuffling his half-crowns with
both his hands in his trouser-pockets, he declared that Messrs Romer
and Reddypalm were the best friends he had known for many a day.

But not the less did he walk out from the room in which he was standing
a broken-hearted man.  Hope could not buoy him up as she may do other
ex-members in similarly disagreeable circumstances.  He could not
afford to look forward to what further favours parliamentary future
have in store for him after a lapse of five or six years.  Five or six
years!  Why, his life was not worth four years' purchase; of that he
was perfectly aware: he could not now live without the stimulus of
brandy; and yet, while he took it, he knew he was killing himself. 
Death he did not fear; but he would fain have wished, after his life of
labour, to have lived, while yet he could live, in the blaze of that
high world to which for a moment he had attained.

He laughed loud and cheerily as he left his parliamentary friends, and,
putting himself into the train, went down to Boxall Hill.  He laughed
loud and cheerily; but he never laughed again.  It had not been his
habit to laugh much at Boxall Hill.  It was there he kept his wife, and
Mr Winterbones, and the brandy bottle behind his pillow.  He had not
often there found it necessary to assume that loud and cheery laugh.

On this occasion he was apparently well in health when he got home; but
both Lady Scatcherd and Mr Winterbones found him more than ordinarily
cross.  He made an affectation at sitting very hard to business, and
even talked of going abroad to look at some of his foreign contracts. 
But even Winterbones found that his patron did not work as he had been 
wont to do; and at last, with some misgivings, he told Lady Scatcherd
that he feared that everything was not right.

'He's always at it, my lady, always,' said Mr Winterbones.

'Is he?' said Lady Scatcherd, well understanding what Mr Winterbones's
allusion meant.

'Always, my lady.  I never saw nothing like it.  Now, there's me--I can
always go my half-hour when I've had my drop; but he, why, he don't go
ten minutes, not now.'

This was not cheerful to Lady Scatcherd; but what was the poor woman to
do?  When she spoke to him on any subject he only snarled at her; and
now that the heavy fit was on him, she did not dare even to mention the
subject of his drinking. She had never known him so savage in his
humour as he was now, so bearish in his habits, so little inclined to 
humanity, so determined to rush headlong down, with his head between
his legs, into the bottomless abyss.

She thought of sending for Dr Thorne; but she did not know under what
guise to send for him,--whether as doctor or as friend: under neither
would he now be welcome; and she well knew that Sir Roger was not the
man to accept in good part either a doctor or a friend who might be
unwelcome.  She knew that this husband of hers, this man, who, with all
his faults, was the best of her friends whom she loved best--she knew
that he was killing himself, and yet she could do nothing.  Sir Roger
was his own master, and if kill himself he would, kill himself he must.

And kill himself he did.  Not indeed by one sudden blow.  He did not
take one huge dose of his consuming poison, and then fall dead upon the
floor.  It would perhaps have been better for himself, and better for
those around him, had he done so. No; the doctors had time to
congregate round his bed; Lady Scatcherd was allowed a period of
nurse-tending; the sick man was able to say his last few words and bid
his adieu to his portion of the lower world with dying decency.  As
these last words will have some lasting effect upon the surviving 
personages of our story, the reader must be content to stand for a
short while by the side of Sir Roger's sick-bed, and help us bid him
God-speed on the journey which lies before him.



CHAPTER XXIII

RETROSPECTIVE

It was declared in the early pages of this work that Dr Thorne was to
be our hero; but it would appear very much as though he had latterly
been forgotten.  Since that evening when he retired to rest without
letting Mary share the grievous weight which was on his mind, we have
neither seen nor heard aught of him. 

It was then full midsummer, and it now early spring: and during the
intervening months the doctor had not had a happy time of it.  On that
night, as we have before told, he took his niece to his heart; but he
could not then bring himself to tell her that which it was so
imperative that she should know.  Like a coward, he would put off the
evil hour, till the next morning, and thus robbed himself of his
night's sleep.

But when the morning came the duty could not be postponed.  Lady
Arabella had given him to understand that his niece would no longer be
a guest at Greshamsbury; and it was quite out of the question that
Mary, after this, should be allowed to put her foot within the gate of
the domain without having learnt what Lady Arabella had said.  So he
told it before breakfast, walking round their little garden, she with
her hand in his.

He was perfectly thunderstruck by the collected--nay, cool way in which
she received his tidings.  She turned pale, indeed; he felt also that
her hand somewhat trembled in his own, and he perceived that for a
moment her voice shook; but no angry word escaped her lip, nor did she
even deign to repudiate the charge, which was, as it were, conveyed in
Lady Arabella's request.  The doctor knew, or thought he knew--nay, he
did know--that Mary was wholly blameless in the matter: that she had at
least given no encouragement to any love on the part of the young heir;
but, nevertheless, he had expected that she would avouch her own
innocence.  This, however, she by no means did.

'Lady Arabella is quite right,' she said, 'quite right; if she has any
fear of that kind, she cannot be too careful.'

'She is a selfish, proud woman,' said the doctor; 'quite indifferent to
the feelings of others; quite careless how deeply she may hurt her
neighbours, if, in doing so, she may possibly benefit herself.'

'She will not hurt me, uncle, nor yet you.  I can live without going to
Greshamsbury.'

'But it is not to be endured that she should dare to cast an imputation
on my darling.'

'On me, uncle?  She casts no imputation on me.  Frank has been foolish:
I have said nothing of it, for it was not worth while to trouble you. 
But as Lady Arabella chooses to interfere, I have no right to blame
her.  He has said what he should not have said; he has been foolish. 
Uncle, you know I could not prevent it.'

'Let her send him away then, not you; let her banish him.'

'Uncle, he is her son.  A mother can hardly send her son away so
easily: could you send me away, uncle?'

He merely answered her by twining his arm round her waist and pressing
her to his side.  He was well sure that she was badly treated; and yet
now that she so unaccountably took Lady Arabella's part, he hardly knew
how to make this out plainly to be the case.

'Besides, uncle, Greshamsbury is in a manner his own; how can he be
banished from his father's house?  No, uncle; there is an end of my
visits there.  They shall find that I will not thrust myself in their
way.'

And then Mary, with a calm brow and steady gait, went in and made the
tea.

And what might be the feelings of her heart when she so sententiously
told her uncle that Frank had been foolish?  She was of the same age
with him; as impressionable, though more powerful in hiding such
impressions,--as all women should be; her heart was as warm, her blood
as full of life, her innate desire for the companionship of some
much-loved object as strong as his.  Frank had been foolish in avowing
his passion. No such folly as that could be laid at her door.  But had
she been proof against the other folly?  Had she been able to walk
heart-whole by his side, while he chatted his commonplaces about love? 
Yes, they are commonplaces when we read them in novels; common enough,
too, to some of us when we write them; but they are by no means
commonplace when first heard by a young girl in the rich, balmy
fragrance of July evening stroll.

Nor are they commonplaces when so uttered for the first or second time
at least, or perhaps the third.  'Tis a pity that so heavenly a
pleasure should pall upon the senses.

If it was so that Frank's folly had been listened to with a certain
amount of pleasure, Mary did not even admit so much to herself.  But
why should it have been otherwise?  Why should she have been less prone
to love than he was?  Had he not everything which girls do love? which
girls should love? which God created noble, beautiful, all but godlike,
in order that women, all but goddesslike, might love?  To love 
thoroughly, truly, heartily, with her whole body, soul, heart, and
strength; should not that be counted for a merit in a woman?  And yet
we are wont to make a disgrace of it.  We do so most unnaturally, most
unreasonably; for we expect our daughters to get themselves married off
our hands.  When the period of that step comes, then love is proper
enough; but up to that--before that--as regards all those preliminary 
passages which must, we suppose, be necessary--in all those it becomes a
young lady to be icy-hearted as a river-god in winter.

    'O whistle and I'll come to you my lad!
     O whistle and I'll come to you my lad!
     Tho' father and mither and a'should go mad
     O whistle and I'll come to you my lad!'

This is the kind of love which a girl should feel before she puts her
hand proudly in that of her lover, and consents that they two shall be
made one flesh.

Mary felt no such love as this.  She, too, had some inner perception of
that dread destiny by which it behoved Frank Gresham to be forewarned.
She, too--though she had never heard so much said in words--had an
almost instinctive knowledge that his fate required him to marry money.
Thinking over this in her own way, she was not slow to convince herself
that it was out of the question that she should allow herself to love
Frank Gresham. However well her heart might be inclined to such a
feeling, it was her duty to repress it. She resolved, therefore, to do
so; and she sometimes flattered herself that she had kept her
resolution.

These were bad times for the doctor, and bad times for Mary too.  She
had declared that she could live without going to Greshamsbury; but she
did not find it so easy.  She had been going to Greshambury all her life,
and it was customary with her to be there as at
home. Such old customs are not broken without pain.  Had she left the
place it would have been far different; but, as it was, she daily
passed the gates, daily saw and spoke to some of the servants, who knew
her as well as they did the young ladies of the family--was in hourly
contact, as it were, with Greshamsbury.  It was not only that she did
not go there, but that every one knew that she had suddenly
discontinued doing so.  Yes, she could live without going to
Greshamsbury; but for some time she had but a poor life of it.  She
felt, nay, almost heard, that every man and woman, boy and girl in the
village was telling his and her neighbour that Mary Thorne no longer
went to the house because of Lady Arabella and the young squire.

But Beatrice, of course, came to her.  What was she to say to
Beatrice?  The truth!  Nay, but it is not always so easy to say the
truth, even to one's dearest friends.

'But you'll come up now he has gone?' said Beatrice.

'No, indeed,' said Mary; 'that would hardly be pleasant to Lady
Arabella, nor to me either.  No, Trichy, dearest; my visits to dear old
Greshamsbury are done, done, done: perhaps in some twenty years' time I
may be walking down the lawn with your brother, and discussing the
childish days--that is, always, if the then Mrs Gresham shall have
invited me.'

'How can Frank have been so wrong, so unkind, so cruel?' said Beatrice.

This, however, was a light in which Miss Thorne did not take any
pleasure, in discussing the matter.  Her ideas of Frank's fault, and
unkindness and cruelty, were doubtless different from those of her
sister.  Such cruelty was not unnaturally excused in her eyes by many
circumstances which Beatrice did not fully understand.  Mary was quite
ready to go hand in hand with Lady Arabella and the rest of
Greshamsbury fold in putting an end, if possible, to Frank's passion:
she would give not one a right to accuse her of assisting to ruin the 
young heir; but she could hardly bring herself to admit that he was so
very wrong--no, nor yet even so very cruel.

And then the squire came to see her, and this was a yet harder trial
than the visit of Beatrice.  It was so difficult for her to speak to
him that she could not but wish him away; and yet, had he not come, had
he altogether neglected her, she would have felt it to be unkind.  She
had ever been his pet, had always received kindness from him.

'I am sorry for all this, Mary; very sorry,' said he, standing up, and
holding both her hands in his.

'It can't be helped, sir,' said she, smiling.

'I don't know,' said he; 'I don't know--it ought to be helped somehow--I
am quite sure you have not been to blame.'

'No,' said she, very quietly, as though the position was one quite a
matter of course.  'I don't think I have been very much to blame. There
will be misfortunes sometimes when nobody is to blame.'

'I do not quite understand it all,' said the squire; 'but if Frank--'

'Oh!  we will not talk about him,' said she, still laughing gently.

'You can understand, Mary, how dear he must be to me; but if--'

'Mr Gresham, I would not for worlds be the cause of any unpleasantness
between you and him.'

'But I cannot bear to think that we have banished you, Mary.'

'It cannot be helped.  Things will all come right in time.'

'But you will be lonely here.'

'Oh!   I shall got over all that.  Here, you know, Mr Gresham, "I am
monarch of all I survey"; and there is a great deal in that.'

The squire did not catch her meaning, but a glimmering of it did reach
him.  It was competent to Lady Arabella to banish her from
Greshamsbury; it was within the sphere of the squire's duties to
prohibit his son from an imprudent match; it was for the Greshams to
guard their Greshamsbury treasure as best they could within their own
territories: but let them beware that they did not attack her on hers. 
In obedience to the first expression of their wishes, she had submitted
herself to this public mark of their disapproval because she had seen
at once, with her clear intellect, that they were only doing that which
her conscience must approve.  Without a murmur, therefore, she
consented to be pointed at as the young lady who had been turned out of
Greshamsbury because of the young squire.  She had no help for it. But
let them take care that they did not go beyond that.  Outside those 
Greshamsbury gates she and Frank Gresham, she and Lady Arabella met on
equal terms; let them each fight their own battle.

The squire kissed her forehead affectionately and took his leave,
feeling somehow, that he had been excused and pitied, and made much of;
whereas he had called on his young neighbour with the intention of
excusing, and pitying, and making much of her.  He was not quite
comfortable as he left the house; but, nevertheless, he was
sufficiently honest-hearted to own to himself that Mary Thorne was a
fine girl.  Only that it was so absolutely necessary that Frank should 
marry money--and only, also, that poor Mary was such a birthless
foundling in the world's esteem--only, but for these things, what a wife
she would have made for that son of his!

To one person only did she talk freely on the subject, and that one was
Patience Oriel; and even with her the freedom was rather of the mind
than of the heart.  She never said a word of her feeling with reference
to Frank, but she said much of her position in the village, and of the
necessity she was under to keep out of the way.

'It is very hard,' said Patience, 'that the offence should be all with
him, and the punishment all with you.'

'Oh!  as for that,' said Mary, laughing, 'I will not confess to any
offence, not yet to any punishment; certainly not to any punishment.'

'It comes to the same thing in the end.'

'No, not so, Patience; there is always some little sting of disgrace in
punishment: now I am not going to hold myself in the least disgraced.'

'But, Mary, you must meet the Greshams sometimes.'

'Meet them!  I have not the slightest objection on earth to meet all,
or any of them.  They are not a whit dangerous to me, my dear.  'Tis
that I am the wild beast, and 'tis that they must avoid me,' and then
she added, after a pause--slightly blushing--'I have not the slightest
objection even to meet him if chance brings him in my way.  Let them
look to that.  My undertaking goes no further than this, that I will 
not be seen within their gates.'

But the girls so far understood each other that Patience undertook,
rather than promised, to give Mary what assistance she could; and,
despite Mary's bravado, she was in such a position that she much wanted
the assistance of such a friend as Patience Oriel.

After an absence of some six weeks, Frank, as we have seen, returned
home.  Nothing was said to him, except by Beatrice, as to those new
Greshamsbury arrangements; and he, when he found Mary was not at the
place, went boldly to the doctor's house to seek her.  But it has been
seen, also, that she discreetly kept out of his way.  This she had
thought fit to do when the time came, although she had been so ready
with her boast that she had no objection on earth to meet him.

After that there had been the Christmas vacation, and Mary had again
found discretion the better part of valour.  This was doubtless
disagreeable enough.  She had no particular wish to spend her Christmas
with Miss Oriel's aunt instead of at her uncle's fireside.  Indeed, her
Christmas festivities had hitherto been kept at Greshamsbury, the
doctor and herself having a part of the family circle there assembled. 
This was out of the question now; and perhaps the absolute change to
old Miss Oriel's house was better for her than the lesser change to her
uncle's drawing-room.  Besides, how could she have demeaned herself
when she met Frank in their parish church?  All this had been fully
understood by Patience, and, therefore, had this Christmas visit been 
planned.

And then this affair of Frank and Mary Thorne ceased for a while to be
talked of at Greshamsbury, for that other affair of  Mr Moffat and
Augusta monopolized the rural attention.  Augusta, as we have said,
bore it well, and sustained the public gaze without much flinching. Her
period of martyrdom, however, did not last long, for soon the news
arrived of Frank's exploit in Pall Mall; and then the Greshamburyites 
forgot to think much more of Augusta, being fully occupied in thinking
of what Frank had done.

The tale, as it was first told, declared the Frank had followed Mr
Moffat up into his club; had dragged him thence into the middle of Pall
Mall, and had then slaughtered him on the spot. This was by degrees
modified till a sobered fiction became generally prevalent, that Mr
Moffat was lying somewhere, still alive, but with all his bones in a
state of compound fracture. This adventure again brought Frank into the
ascendant, and restored to Mary her former position as the Greshamsbury
heroine.

'One cannot wonder at his being very angry,' said Beatrice, discussing
the matter with Mary--very imprudently.

'Wonder--no; the wonder would have been if he had not been angry.  One
might have been quite sure that he would have been angry enough.'

'I suppose it was not absolutely right for him to beat Mr Moffat,' said
Beatrice, apologetically.

'Not right, Trichy?  I think he was very right.'

'Not to beat him so much, Mary!'

'Oh, I suppose a man can't exactly stand measuring how much he does
these things.  I like your brother for what he has done, and I may say
so frankly--though I suppose I ought to eat my tongue out before I
should say such a thing, eh Trichy?'

'I don't know that there's any harm in that,' said Beatrice, demurely. 
'If you both liked each other there would be no harm in that--if that
were all.'

'Wouldn't there?' said Mary, in a low tone of bantering satire; 'that
is so kind, Trichy, coming from you--from one of the family, you know.'

'You are well aware, Mary, that if I could have my wishes--'

'Yes: I am well aware what a paragon of goodness you are.  If you could
have your way I should be admitted into heaven again; shouldn't I? Only
with this proviso, that if a stray angel should ever whisper to me with
bated breath, mistaking me, perchance, for one of his own class, I
should be bound to close my ears to his whispering, and remind him
humbly that I was only a poor mortal.  You would trust me so far,
wouldn't you, Trichy?'

'I would trust you in any way, Mary.  But I think you are unkind in
saying such things to me.'

'Into whatever heaven I am admitted, I will go only on this 
understanding: that I am to be as good an angel as any of those around
me.'

'But, Mary dear, why do you say this to me?'

'Because--because--because--ah me!  Why, indeed, but because I have no 
one else to say it to.  Certainly not because you have deserved it.'

'It seems as if you were finding fault with me.'

'And so I am; how can I do other than find fault?  How can I help being
sore?  Trichy, you hardly realize my position; you hardly see how I am
treated; how I am forced to allow myself to be treated without a sign
of complaint.  You don't see it all. If you did, you would not wonder
that I should be sore.'

Beatrice did not quite see it all; but she saw enough of it to know
that Mary was to be pitied; so, instead of scolding her friend for
being cross, she threw her arms round her and kissed her
affectionately.

But the doctor all this time suffered much more than his niece did.  He
could not complain out loudly; he could not aver that his pet lamb had
been ill treated; he could not even have the pleasure of openly
quarrelling with Lady Arabella; but not the less did he feel it to be
most cruel that Mary should have to live before the world as an
outcast, because it had pleased Frank Gresham to fall in love with her.

But his bitterness was not chiefly against Frank.  That Frank had been
very foolish he could not but acknowledge; but it was a kind of folly
for which the doctor was able to find excuse. For Lady Arabella's cold
propriety he could find no excuse.

With the squire he had spoken no word on the subject up to this period
of which we are now writing.  With her ladyship he had never spoken on
it since that day when she had told him that Mary was to come no more
to Greshamsbury.  He never now dined or spent his evenings at
Greshamsbury, and seldom was to be seen at the house, except when
called in professionally.  The squire, indeed, he frequently met; but 
he either did so in the village, or out on horseback, or at his own
house.

When the doctor first heard that Sir Roger had lost his seat, and had
returned to Boxall Hill, he resolved to go over and see him.  But the
visit was postponed from day to day, as visits are postponed which may
be made any day, and he did not in fact go till summoned there somewhat
peremptorily.  A message was brought to him one evening to say that Sir
Roger had been struck by paralysis, and that not a moment was to be 
lost.

'It always happens at night,' said Mary, who had more sympathy for the
living uncle whom she did know, than for the other dying uncle whom she
did not know.

'What matters?--there--just give me my scarf.  In all probability I may
not be home to-night--perhaps not till late to-morrow.  God bless you,
Mary!' and away the doctor went on his cold bleak ride to Boxall Hill.

'Who is to be his heir?'  As the doctor rode along, he could not quite
rid his mind of the question.  The poor man now about to die had wealth
enough to make many heirs.  What if his heart should have softened
towards his sister's child!  What if Mary should be found to be
possessed of such wealth that the Greshams should be again be happy to
welcome her at Greshamsbury!

The doctor was not a lover of money--and he did his best to get rid of
such pernicious thoughts.  But his longings, perhaps, were not so much
that Mary should be rich, as that she should have the power of heaping
coals of fire upon the heads of those people who had so injured her.



CHAPTER XXIV

LOUIS SCATCHERD

When Dr Thorne reached Boxall Hill he found Mr Rerechild from 
Barchester there before him.  Poor Lady Scatcherd, when her husband was
stricken by the fit, hardly knew in her dismay what adequate steps to
take.  She had, as a matter of course, sent for Dr Thorne; but she had
thought it so grave a peril that the medical skill of no one man could
suffice.  It was, she knew, quite out of the question for her to invoke
the aid of Dr Fillgrave, whom no earthly persuasion could have brought
to Boxall Hill; and as Mr Rerechild was supposed in the Barchester
world to be second--though at a long interval--to that great man, she
had applied for his assistance.

Now Mr Rerechild was a follower and humble friend of Dr Fillgrave; and
was wont to regard anything that came from the Barchester doctor as
sure as light from the lamp of Aesculapius.  He could not therefore be
other than an enemy of Dr Thorne.  But he was a prudent, discreet man,
with a long family, averse to professional hostilities, as knowing that
he could make more by medical friends than medical foes, and not at all
inclined to take up any man's cudgel to his own detriment.  He had, of
course, heard of that dreadful affront which had been put upon his
friend, as had all the 'medical world'--and all the medical world at
least of Barsetshire; and he had often expressed sympathy with Dr 
Fillgrave and his abhorrence of Dr Thorne's anti-professional 
practices.  But now that he found himself about to be brought in
contact with Dr Thorne, he reflected that the Galen of Greshamsbury was
at any rate equal in reputation to him of Barchester; that the one was
probably on the rise, whereas the other was already considered by some
as rather antiquated; and he therefore wisely resolved that the present
would be an excellent opportunity for him to make a friend of Dr
Thorne.

Poor Lady Scatcherd had an inkling that Dr Fillgrave and Mr Rerechild
were accustomed to row in the same boat, and she was not altogether
free from fear that there might be an outbreak. She therefore took an
opportunity before Dr Thorne's arrival to deprecate any wrathful
tendency.

'Oh, Lady Scatcherd!  I have the greatest respect for Dr Thorne,' said
he; 'the greatest possible respect; a most skilful
practitioner--something brusque, certainly, and perhaps a little
obstinate.  But what then?  we have all our faults, Lady Scatcherd.'

'Oh--yes; we all have, Mr Rerechild; that's a certain.'

'There's my friend Fillgrave--Lady Scatcherd.  He cannot bear anything
of that sort.  Now I think he's wrong; and so I tell him.' Mr Rerechild
was in error here; for he had never yet ventured to tell Dr Fillgrave
that he was wrong in anything. 'We must bear and forbear, you know.  Dr
Thorne is an excellent man--in his way very excellent, Lady Scatcherd.'

This little conversation took place after Mr Rerechild's first visit to
his patient: what steps were immediately taken for the relief of the
sufferer we need not describe.  They were doubtless well intended, and
were, perhaps, as well adapted to stave off the coming evil day as any
that Dr Fillgrave, or even the great Sir Omicron Pie might have used.

And then Dr Thorne arrived.

'Oh, doctor!  doctor!' exclaimed Lady Scatcherd, almost hanging round
his neck in the hall.  'What are we to do?  What are we to do?  He's
very bad.'

'Has he spoken?'

'No; nothing like a word: he has made one or two muttered sounds; but,
poor soul, you could make nothing of it--oh, doctor!  doctor!  he has
never been like this before.

It was easy to see where Lady Scatcherd placed any such faith as she
might still have in the healing art.  'Mr Rerechild is here and has
seen him,' she continued.  'I thought it best to send for two, for fear
of accidents.  He has done something--I don't know what.  But, doctor,
do tell the truth now; I look to you to tell me the truth.'

Dr Thorne went up and saw his patient; and had he literally complied
with Lady Scatcherd's request, he might have told her at once that
there was no hope.  As, however, he had not the heart to do this, he
mystified the case as doctors so well know how to do, and told her that
'there was cause to fear, great cause for fear; he was sorry to say,
very great cause for much fear.'

Dr Thorne promised to stay the night there, and, if possible, the
following night also; and then Lady Scatcherd became troubled in her
mind as to what she should do with Mr Rerechild.  He also declared,
with much medical humanity, that, let the inconvenience be what it
might, he too would stay the night.  'The loss,' he said, 'of such a
man as Sir Roger Scatcherd was of such paramount importance as to make 
other matters trivial.  He would certainly not allow the whole weight
to fall on the shoulders of his friend Dr Thorne: he also would stay at
any rate that night by the sick man's bedside.  By the following
morning some change might be excpected.'

'I say, Dr Thorne,' said her ladyship, calling the doctor into the
housekeeping-room, in which she and Hannah spent any time that they
were not required upstairs; 'just come in, doctor: you wouldn't tell
him we don't want him no more, could you?'

'Tell whom?' said the doctor.

'Why--Mr Rerechild: mightn't he go away, do you think?'

Dr Thorne explained that Mr Rerechild might go away if he pleased; but
that it would by no means be proper for one doctor to tell another to
leave the house.  And so Mr Rerechild was allowed to share the glories
of the night.

In the meantime the patient remained speechless; but it soon became
evident that Nature was using all her efforts to make one final rally. 
From time to time he moaned and muttered as though he was conscious,
and it seemed as though he strove to speak.  He gradually became awake,
at any rate to suffering, and Dr Thorne began to think that the last
scene would be postponed for yet a while longer.

'Wonderful constitution--eh, Dr Thorne?  wonderful!' said Mr Rerechild.

'Yes; he has been a strong man.'

'Strong as a horse, Dr Thorne.  Lord, what that man would have been if
he had given himself a chance!  You know his constitution of course.'

'Yes; pretty well.  I've attended him for many years.'

'Always drinking, I suppose; always at it--eh?'

'He has not been a temperate man, certainly.'

'The brain, you see, clean gone--and not a particle of coating left to
the stomach; and yet what a struggle he makes--an interesting case,
isn't it?'

'It's very sad to see such an intellect so destroyed.'

'Very sad, very sad indeed.  How Fillgrave would have liked to have
seen this case.  He is a very clever man, is Fillgrave--in his way, you
know.'

'I'm sure he is,' said Dr Thorne.

'Not that he'd make anything of a case like this now--he's not, you
know, quite--quite--perhaps not quite up to the new time of day, one
might say so.'

'He has had a very extensive provincial practice,' said Dr Thorne.

'Oh, very--very; and made a tidy lot of money too, has Fillgrave.  He's
worth six thousand pounds, I suppose; now that's a good deal of money
to put by in a little town like Barchester.'

'Yes, indeed.'

'What I say to Fillgrave is--keep your eyes open; one should never be
too old to learn--there's always something new worth picking up.  But
no--he won't believe that.  He can't believe that any new ideas can be
worth anything.  You know a man must go to the wall in that way--eh,
doctor?'

And then again they were called to their patient.  'He's doing finely,
finely,' said Mr Rerechild to Lady Scatcherd.  'There's fair ground to
hope he'll rally; fair ground, is there not, doctor?'

'Yes; he'll rally; but how long that may last, that we can hardly say.'

'Oh, no, certainly not, certainly not--that is not with any certainty;
but still he's doing finely, Lady Scatcherd, considering everything.'

'How long will you give him, doctor?' said Mr Rerechild to his new
friend, when they were again alone.  'Ten days?  I dare say ten days,
or from that to a fortnight.'

'Perhaps so,' said the doctor.  'I should not like to say exactly to a
day.'

'No, certainly not.  We cannot say exactly to a day; but I say ten
days; as for anything like a recovery, that you know--'

'Is out of the question,' said Dr Thorne, gravely.

'Quite so; quite so; coating of the stomach clean gone, you know; brain
destroyed: did you observe the periporollida?  I never saw them so
swelled before: now when the periporollida are swollen like that--'

'Yes, very much; it's always the case when paralysis has been brought
about by intemperance.'

'Always, always; I have remarked that always; the periporollida in such
cases are always extended; most interesting case, isn't it?  I do wish
Fillgrave could have seen it.  But, I believe you and Dr Fillgrave
don't quite--eh?'

'No, not quite,'said Dr Thorne; who, as he thought of his last
interview with Dr Fillgrave, and of that gentleman's exceeding anger as
he stood in the hall below, could not keep himself from smiling, sad as
the occasion was.

Nothing would induced Lady Scatcherd to go to bed; but the two doctors
agreed to lie down, each in a room on one side of the patient.  How was
it possible that anything but good should come to him, being so
guarded?  'He's going on finely, Lady Scatcherd, quite finely,' were
the last words Mr Rerechild said as he left the room.

And then Dr Thorne, taking Lady Scatcherd's hand and leading her out
into another chamber, told her the truth.

'Lady Scatcherd,' said he, in his tenderest voice--and his voice could
be very tender when occasion required it--'Lady Scatcherd, do not hope;
you must not hope; it would be cruel to bid you to do so.'

'Oh, doctor!  oh, doctor!'

'My dear friend, there is no hope.'

'Oh, Dr Thorne!' said the wife, looking wildly up into her companion's
face, though she hardly yet realized the meaning of what he said,
although her senses were half stunned by the blow.

'Dear Lady Scatcherd, is it not better that I should tell you the
truth?'

'Oh, I suppose so; oh yes, oh yes; ah me! ah me! ah me!'  And then she
began rocking herself backwards and forwards on her chair, with her
apron up to her eyes.

'Look to Him, Lady Scatcherd, who only can make such grief endurable.'

'Yes, yes, yes; I suppose so.  Ah me!  ah me!  But, Dr Thorne, there
must be some chance--isn't there any chance?  That man says he's going
on so well.'

'I fear there is no chance--as far as my knowledge goes there is no
chance.'

'Then why does that chattering magpie tell such lies to a woman?  Ah
me! ah me! oh, doctor!  doctor!  what shall I do? what shall I do?' and
poor Lady Scatcherd, fairly overcome by her sorrow, burst out crying
like a great school-girl.

And yet what had her husband done for her that she should thus weep for
him?  Would not her life be much more blessed when this cause of all
her troubles should be removed from her?  Would she not then be a free
woman instead of a slave? Might she not then expect to begin to taste
the comforts of life?  What had that harsh tyrant of hers done that was
good or serviceable for her?  Why should she thus weep for him in 
paroxysms of truest grief?

We hear a good deal of jolly widows; and the slanderous raillery of the
world tell much of conjugal disturbances as a cure for which women will
look forward to a state of widowhood with not unwilling eyes.  The
raillery of the world is very slanderous.  In our daily jests we
attribute to each other vices of which neither we, nor our neighbours,
nor our friends, nor even our enemies are ever guilty.  It is our 
favourite parlance to talk of the family troubles of Mrs Green on our
right, and to tell now Mrs Young on our left is strongly suspected of
having raised her hand to her lord and master.  What right have we to
make these charges?  What have we seen in our own personal walks
through life to make us believe that women are devils?  There may
possibly have been Xantippe here and there, but Imogenes are to be
found in every bush.  Lady Scatcherd, in spite of the life she had led,
was one of them.

'You should send a message up to London for Louis,' said the doctor.

'We did that, doctor; we did that to-day--we sent up a telegraph.  Oh
me!  oh me!  poor boy, what will he do?  I shall never know what to do
with him, never!  never!'  And with such sorrowful wailings she sat
rocking herself through the long night, every now and then comforting
herself by the performance of some menial service in the sick man's
room.

Sir Roger passed the night much as he had passed the day, except that
he appeared 