gradually to be growing nearer to a state of
consciousness.  On the following morning they succeeded at last in
making Mr Rerechild understand that they were not desirous of keeping
him longer from his Barchester practice; and at about twelve o'clock Dr
Thorne also went, promising that he would return in the evening, and
again pass the night at Boxall Hill. 

In the course of the afternoon Sir Roger once more awoke to his senses,
and when he did so his son was standing at his bedside. Louis Philippe
Scatcherd--or as it may be more convenient to call him, Louis--was a
young man just of the age of Frank Gresham.  But there could hardly be
two youths more different in their appearance.  Louis, though his
father and mother were both robust persons, was short and slight, and 
now of a sickly frame.  Frank was a picture of health and strength;
but, though manly in disposition, was by no means precocious either in
appearance or manners.  Louis Scatcherd looked as though he was four
years the other's senior.  He had been sent to Eton when he was
fifteen, his father being under the impression that this was the most
ready and best-recognized method of making him a gentleman.  Here he
did not altogether fail as regarded the coveted object of his becoming
the companion of gentlemen.  He had more pocket-money than any other
lad in the school, and was possessed of a certain effrontery which
carried him ahead among boys of his own age.  He gained, therefore, a
degree of eclat, even among those who knew, and very frequently said to
each other, that young Scatcherd was not fit to be their companion
except on such open occasions as those of cricket-matches and boat-
races.  Boys, in this respect, are at least as exclusive as men, and
understand as well the difference between an inner and outer circle. 
Scatcherd had many companions at school who were glad enough to go up
to Maidenhead with him his boat; but there was not one among them who
would have talked to him of his sister.

Sir Roger was vastly proud of his son's success, and did his best to
stimulate it by lavish expenditure at the Christopher, whenever he
could manage to run down to Eton.  But this practice, though
sufficiently unexceptionable to the boys, was not held in equal delight
by the masters.  To tell the truth, neither Sir Roger nor his son were
favourites with these stern custodians.  At last it was felt necessary
to get rid of them both; and Louis was not long in giving them an 
opportunity, by getting tipsy twice in one week.  On the second
occasion he was sent away, and he and Sir Roger, though long talked of,
were  seen no more at Eton.

But the universities were still open to Louis Philippe, and before he
was eighteen he was entered as a gentleman-commoner at Trinity.  As he
was, moreover, the eldest son of a baronet, and had almost unlimited
command of money, here also he was enabled for a while to shine.

To shine!  but very fitfully; and one may say almost with a ghastly
glare.  The very lads who had eaten his father's dinners at Eton, and
shared his four-oar at Eton, knew much better than to associate with
him at Cambridge now that they had put on the toga virilis.  They were
still as prone as ever to fun, frolic, and devilry--perhaps more so than
ever, seeing that more was in their power; but they acquired an idea
that it behoved them to be somewhat circumspect as to the men with whom
their pranks were perpetrated.  So, in those days, Louis Scatcherd was
coldly looked on by his whilom Eton friends.

But young Scatcherd did not fail to find companions at Cambridge also. 
There are few places indeed in which a rich man cannot buy
companionship.  But the set with whom he lived, were the worst of the
place.  They were fast, slang men, who were fast and slang, and nothing
else--men who imitated grooms in more than their dress, and who looked
on the customary heroes of race-courses as the highest lords of the
ascendant upon earth.  Among those at college young Scatcherd did shine
as long as such lustre was permitted him. Here, indeed, his father, who
had striven only to encourage him at Eton, did strive somewhat to
control him.  But that was not now easy.  If he limited his son's
allowance, he only drove him to do his debauchery on credit.  There
were plenty to lend money to the son of a great millionaire; and so, 
after eighteen months' trial of a university education, Sir Roger had
no alternative but to withdraw his son from his alma mater.

What was he to do with him?  Unluckily it was considered quite
unnecessary to take any steps towards enabling him to earn his bread. 
Now nothing on earth can be more difficult than bringing up well a
young man who has not to earn his own bread, and who has no recognized
station among other men similarly circumstanced.  Juvenile dukes, and
sprouting earls, find their duties and their places as easily as embryo
clergymen and sucking barristers.  Provision is made for their peculiar
positions: and, though they may possibly go astray, they have a fair
chance given to them of running within the posts.  The same may be said
of such youths as Frank Gresham.  There are enough of them in the
community to have made it necessary that their well-being should be a 
matter of care and forethought.  But there are but few men turned out
in the world in the position of Louis Scatcherd; and, of those few, but
very few enter the real battle of life under good auspices.

Poor Sir Roger though he had hardly time with all his multitudinous
railways to look into this thoroughly, had a glimmering of it.  When he
saw his son's pale face, and paid his wine bills, and heard of his
doings in horse-flesh, he did know that things were not going well; he
did understand that the heir to a baronetcy and a fortune of some ten 
thousand a year might be doing better.  But what was he to do?  he
could not watch over his boy himself; so he took a tutor for him and
sent him abroad.

Louis and the tutor got as far as Berlin, with what mutual satisfaction
to each other need not be specially described.  But from Berlin Sir
Roger received a letter in which the tutor declined to go any further
in the task which he had undertaken. He found that he had no influence
over his pupil, and he could not reconcile it to his conscience to be 
the spectator of such a life as that which Mr Scatcherd led. He had no
power in inducing Mr Scatcherd to leave Berlin; but he would remain
there himself till he should hear from Sir Roger.  So Sir Roger had to
leave the huge Government works which he was then erecting on the
southern coast, and hurry off to Berlin to see what could be done with
young Hopeful.

The young Hopeful was by no means a fool; and in some matters was more
than a match for his father.  Sir Roger, in his anger, threatened to
cast him off without a shilling.  Louis, with mixed penitence and
effrontery, reminded him that he could not change the descent of the
title; promised amendment; declared that he had done only as do other
young men of fortune; and hinted that the tutor was a strait-laced 
ass.  The father and the son returned together to Boxall Hill, and
three months afterwards Mr Scatcherd set up for himself in London.

And now his life, if not more virtuous, was more crafty than it had
been.  He had no tutor to watch his doings and complain of them, and he
had sufficient sense to keep himself from absolute pecuniary ruin.  He
lived, it is true, where sharpers and blacklegs had too often
opportunities of plucking him; but, young as he was, he had been
sufficiently long about the world to take care he was not openly
robbed; and as he was not openly robbed, his father, in a certain 
sense, was proud of him.

Tidings, however, came--came at least in those last days--which cut Sir
Roger to the quick; tidings of vice in the son which the father could
not but attribute to his own example.  Twice his mother was called up
to the sick-bed of her only child, while he lay raving in that horrid
madness by which the outraged mind avenges itself on the body!  Twice
he was found raging in delirium tremens, and twice the father was told 
that a continuance of such life must end in early death.

It may easily be conceived that Sir Roger was not a happy man. Lying
there with that brandy bottle beneath his pillow, reflecting in his
moments of rest that that son of his had his brandy bottle beneath his
pillow, he could hardly have been happy.  But he was not a man to say
much about his misery.  Though he could restrain neither himself nor
his heir, he could endure in silence; and in silence he did endure,
till, opening his eyes to the consciousness of death, he at last spoke
a few words to the only friend he knew.

Louis Scatcherd was not a fool, nor was he naturally, perhaps, of a
depraved disposition; but he had to reap the fruits of the worst
education which England was able to give him.  There were moments in
his life when he felt that a better, a higher, nay, a much happier
career was open to him than that which he had prepared himself to
lead.  Now and then, he would reflect what money and rank might have
done for him; he would look with wishful eyes to the proud doings of
others of his age; would dream of quiet joys, of a sweet wife, a house
to which might be asked friends who were neither jockeys nor drunkards;
he would dream of such things in his short intervals of constrained
sobriety; but the dream would only serve to make him moody.

This was the best side of his character; the worst, probably, was that
which was brought into play by the fact that he was not a fool.  He
would have a better chance of redemption in this world--perhaps also in
another--had he been a fool.  As it was, he was no fool: he was not to
be done, not he; he knew, no one better, the value of a shilling; he
knew, also, how to keep his shillings, and how to spend them.  He
consorted much with blacklegs and such-like because blacklegs were to
his taste.  But he boasted daily, nay, hourly to himself, and 
frequently to those around him, that the leeches who were stuck round
him could draw but little blood from him.  He could spend his money
freely; but he would so spend it that he himself might reap the
gratification of the expenditure.  He was acute, crafty, knowing, and
up to every damnable dodge practised by men of the class with whom he
lived.  At one-and-twenty he was that most odious of all odious
characters-a close-fisted reprobate.

He was a small man, not ill-made by Nature, but reduced to unnatural
tenuity by dissipation-a corporeal attribute of which he was apt to
boast, as it enabled him, as he said, to put himself up at 7st 7lb
without any 'd--- nonsense of not eating and drinking'.  The power,
however, was one of which he did not often avail himself, as his nerves
were seldom in a fit state for riding.  His hair was dark red, and he
wore red moustaches, and a great deal of red beard beneath his chin,
cut in a manner to make him look like an American.  His voice also had
a Yankee twang, being a cross between that of an American trader and an
English groom; and his eyes were keen and fixed, and cold and knowing.

Such was the son whom Sir Roger saw standing at his bedside when first
he awoke to his consciousness.  It must not be supposed that Sir Roger
looked at him with our eyes.  To him he was an only child, the heir of
his wealth, the future bearer of his title; the most heart-stirring
remembrancer of those days, when he had been so much a poorer, and so
much a happier man. Let that boy be bad or good, he was all Sir Roger
had; and the father was still able to hope, when others thought that
all ground for hope was gone.

The mother also loved her son with a mother's natural love; but Louis
had ever been ashamed of his mother, and had, as far as possible,
estranged himself from her.  Her heart, perhaps, fixed itself almost
with almost a warmer love on Frank Gresham, her foster-son.  Frank she
saw but seldom, but when she did see him he never refused her embrace. 
There was, too, a joyous, genial lustre about Frank's face which always
endeared him to women, and made his former nurse regard him as the pet
creation of the age.  Though she but seldom interfered with any
monetary arrangement of her husband's, yet once or twice she had
ventured to hint that a legacy left to the young squire would make her
a happy woman. Sir Roger, however, on these occasions had not appeared
very desirous of making his wife happy.

'Ah, Louis!  is that you?' ejaculated Sir Roger, in tones hardly more
than half-formed: afterwards in a day or two that is, he fully
recovered his voice; but just then he could hardly open his jaws, and
spoke almost through his teeth.  He managed, however, to put out his
hand and lay it on the counterpane, so that his son could take it.

'Why, that's well, governor,' said the son; 'you'll be as right as a
trivet in a day or two--eh, governor?'

The 'governor' smiled with a ghastly smile.  He already pretty well
knew that he would never again be 'right' as his son called it, on that
side of the grave.  It did not, moreover, suit him to say much just at
that moment, so he contented himself with holding his son's hand.  He
lay still in this position for a moment, and then, turning round 
painfully on his side, endeavoured to put his hand to the place where
his dire enemy usually was concealed.  Sir Roger, however, was too weak
now to be his own master; he was at length, though too late, a captive
in the hands of nurses and doctors, and the bottle had now been
removed.

Then Lady Scatcherd came in, and seeing that her husband was not longer
unconscious, she could not but believe that Dr Thorne had been wrong;
she could not but think that there must be some ground for hope.  She
threw herself on her knees at the bedside bursting into tears as she
did so, and taking Sir Roger's hand in hers and covered it with kisses.

'Bother!' said Sir Roger.

She did not, however, long occupy herself with the indulgence of her
feelings; but going speedily to work, produced such sustenance as the
doctors had ordered to be given when the patient might awake.  A
breakfast-cup was brought to him, and a few drops were put into his
mouth; but he soon made it manifest that he would take nothing more of
a description so perfectly innocent.

'A drop of brandy--just a little drop,' said he, half-ordering,
half-entreating.

'Ah, Roger,' said Lady Scatcherd.

'Just a little drop, Louis,' said the sick man, appealing to his son.

'A little will be good for him; bring the bottle, mother,' said the
son.

After some altercation the brandy bottle was brought, and Louis, with
what a thought a very sparing hand, proceeded to pour about half a
wine--glass into the cup.  As he did so, Sir Roger, weak as he was,
contrived to shake his son's arm, so as greatly to increase the dose.

'Ha! ha! ha!' laughed the sick man, and then greedily swallowed the
dose.



CHAPTER XXV

SIR ROGER DIES

That night the doctor stayed at Boxall Hill, and the next night; so
that it became a customary thing for him to sleep there during the
latter part of Sir Roger's illness.  He returned home to Greshamsbury;
for he had his patients there, to whom he was as necessary as to Sir
Roger, the foremost of whom was Lady Arabella.  He had, therefore, no
slight work on his hands, seeing that his nights were by no means
wholly devoted to rest.

Mr Rerechild had not been much wrong as to the remaining space of life
which he had allotted to the dying man.  Once or twice Dr Thorne had
thought that the great original strength of his patient would have
enabled him to fight against death for a somewhat longer period; but
Sir Roger would give himself no chance.  Whenever he was strong enough 
to have a will of his own, he insisted on having his very medicine
mixed with brandy; and in the hours of the doctor's absence, he was too
often successful in his attempts.

'It does not much matter,' Dr Thorne had said to Lady Scatcherd.  'Do
what you can to keep down the quantity, but do not irritate him by
refusing to obey.  It does not much signify now.'  So Lady Scatcherd
still administered the alcohol, and he from day to day invented little
schemes for increasing the amount, over which he chuckled with ghastly 
laughter.

Two or three times these days Sir Roger essayed to speak seriously to
his son; but Louis always frustrated him.  He either got out of the
room on some excuse, or made his mother interfere on the score that so
much talking would be bad for his father.  He already knew with
tolerable accuracy what was the purport of his father's will, and by no
means approved of it; but as he could not now hope to induce his father
to alter it so as to make it more favourable to himself, he conceived
that no conversation on matters of business could be of use to him.

'Louis,' said Sir Roger, one afternoon to his son; 'Louis, I have not
done by you as I ought to have done--I know that now.'

'Nonsense, governor; never mind about it now; I shall do well enough I
dare say.  Besides, it isn't too late; you can make it twenty-three
years instead of twenty-five.'

'I do not mean as to money, Louis.  There are things besides money
which a father ought to look to.'

'Now, father, don't fret yourself--I'm all right; you may be sure of
that.'

'Louis, it's that accursed brandy--it's that that I'm afraid of: you see
me here, my boy, I'm lying here now.'

'Don't you be annoying yourself, governor; I'm all right--quite right;
and as for you, why, you'll be up and about yourself in another month
or so.'

'I shall never be off this bed, my boy, till I'm carried into my
coffin, on those chairs there.  But I'm not thinking of myself, Louis,
but you; think what you may have before you if you can't avoid that
accursed bottle.'

'I'm all right, governor; right as a trivet.  It's very little I take,
except at an odd time or two.'

'Oh, Louis!  Louis!'

'Come, father, cheer up; this sort of thing isn't the thing for you at
all.  I wonder where mother is: she ought to be here with the broth;
just let me go, and I'll see for her.'

The father understood it all.  He saw that it was now much beyond his
faded powers to touch the heart or conscience of such a youth as his
son had become.  What now could he do for his boy except die?  What
else, what other benefit, did his son require of him but to die; to die
so that his means of dissipation might be unbounded?  He let go the
unresisting hand which he held, and, as the young man crept out of the 
room, he turned his face to the wall.  He turned his face to the wall,
and held bitter commune with his own heart.  To what had he brought
himself?  To what had he brought his son? Oh, how happy would it have
been for him could he have remained all his days a working stone-mason
in Barchester!  How happy could he have died as such, years ago!  Such
tears as those which wet the pillow are the bitterest which human eyes
can shed.

But while they were dropping, the memoir of his life was in quick
course of preparation.  It was, indeed, nearly completed, with
considerable detail.  He had lingered on four days longer than might
have been expected, and the author had thus had more than usual time
for the work.  In these days a man is nobody unless his biography is
kept so far posted up that it may be ready for the national
breakfast-table on the morning after his demise.  When it chances that
the dead hero is one who is taken in his prime of life, of whose
departure from among us the most far-seeing, biographical scribe can 
have no prophetic inkling, this must be difficult.  Of great men, full
of years, who are ripe of the sickle, who in the course of Nature must
soon fall, it is of course comparatively easy for an active compiler to
have his complete memoir ready in his desk.  But in order that the idea
of omnipresent and omniscient information may be kept up, the young
must be chronicled as quickly as the old.  In some cases this task
must, one would say, be difficult.  Nevertheless it is done.

The memoir of Sir Roger Scatcherd was progressing favourably. In this
it was told how fortunate had been his life; now, in his case, industry
and genius combined had triumphed over the difficulties which humble
birth and deficient education had thrown in his way; how he had made a
name among England's great men; how the Queen had delighted to honour
him, and nobles had been proud to have him as a guest at their 
mansions.  Then followed a list of all the great works which he had
achieved, of the railroads, canals, docks, harbours, jails, and
hospitals which he had constructed.  His name was held up as an example
to the labouring classes of his countrymen, and he was pointed at as
one who had lived and died happy--ever happy, said the biographer,
because ever industrious.  And so a great moral question was
inculcated.  A short paragraph was devoted to his appearance in 
Parliament; and unfortunate Mr Romer was again held up for disgrace,
for the thirtieth time, as having been the means of depriving our
legislative councils of the great assistance of Sir Roger's experience.

'Sir Roger,' said the biographer in his concluding passage, 'was
possessed of an iron frame; but even iron will yield to the repeated
blows of the hammer.  In the latter years of his life he was known to
overtask himself; and at length the body gave way, though the mind
remained firm to the last.  The subject of this memoir was only
fifty-nine when he was taken from us.'

And thus Sir Roger's life was written, while the tears were yet falling
on his pillow at Boxall Hill.  It was a pity that a proof-sheet could
not have been sent to him.  No man was vainer of his reputation, and it
would have greatly gratified him to know that posterity was about to
speak of him in such terms--to speak of him with a voice that would be
audible for twenty-four hours.

Sir Roger made no further attempt to give counsel to his son. It was
too evidently useless.  The old dying lion felt that the lion's power
had already passed from him, and that he was helpless in the hands of
the young cub who was so soon to inherit the wealth of the forest.  But
Dr Thorne was more kind to him.  He had something yet to say as to his
worldly hopes and worldly cares; and his old friend did not turn a deaf
ear to him.

It was during the night that Sir Roger was most anxious to talk, and
most capable of talking.  He would lie through the day in a state
half-comatose; but towards evening would rouse himself, and by midnight
he would be full of fitful energy.  One night, as he lay wakeful and
full of thought, he thus poured forth his whole heart to Dr Thorne.

'Thorne,' said he, 'I told you about my will, you know.'

'Yes,' said the other; 'and I have blamed myself greatly that I have
not again urged you to alter it.  Your illness came too suddenly,
Scatcherd; and then I was averse to speak of it.'

'Why should I alter it?  It is a good will; as good as I can make.  Not
but that I have altered it since I spoke to you.  I did it that day
after you left me.'

'Have you definitely named your heir in default of Louis?'

'No--that is--yes--I had done that before; I have said Mary's eldest
child: I have not altered that.'

'But, Scatcherd, you must alter it.'

'Must!  well then, I won't; but I'll tell you what I have done. I have
added a postscript--a codicil they call it--saying that you, and you
only, know who is her eldest child.  Winterbones and Jack Martin have
witnessed that.'

Dr Thorne was going to explain how very injudicious such an arrangement
appeared to be; but Sir Roger would not listen to him.  It was not
about that that he wished to speak to him.  To him it was a matter of
but minor interest who might inherit his money if his son should die
early; his care was solely for his son's welfare.  At twenty-five the
heir might make his own will--might bequeath all this wealth according
to his own fancy. Sir Roger would not bring himself to believe that his
son could follow him to the grave in so short a time.

'Never mind that, doctor, now; but about Louis; you will be his
guardian, you know.'

'Not his guardian.  He is more than of age.'

'Ah!  but doctor, you will be his guardian.  The property will not be
his till he be twenty-five.  You will not desert him?'

'I will not desert him; but I doubt whether I can do much for him--what
can I do, Scatcherd?'

'Use the power that a strong man has over a weak one.  Use the power
that my will will give you.  Do for him as you would for a son of your
own if you saw him going in bad courses.  Do as a friend should do for
a friend that is dead and gone.  I would do so for you, doctor, if our
places were changed.'

'What can I do, that I will do,' said Thorne, solemnly, taking as he
spoke the contractor's own in his own with a tight grasp.

'I know you will; I know you will.  Oh!  doctor, may you never feel as
I do now!  May you on your death-bed have no dread as I have, as to the
fate of those you will leave behind you!'

Doctor Thorne felt that he could not say much in answer to this.  The
future fate of Louis Scatcherd was, he could not but own to himself,
greatly to be dreaded.  What good, what happiness, could be presaged
for such a one as he was?  What comfort could he offer to the father? 
And then he was called on to compare, as it were, the prospects of this
unfortunate with those of his own darling; to contrast all that was 
murky, foul, and disheartening, with all that was perfect--for to him
she was all but perfect; to liken Louis Scatcherd to the angel who
brightened his own hearthstone.  How could he answer to such an appeal?

He said nothing; but merely tightened his grasp of the other's hand, to
signify that he would do, as best he could, all that was asked of him. 
Sir Roger looked up sadly into the doctor's face, as though expecting
some word of consolation.  There was no comfort, no consolation.

'For three or four years, he must greatly depend on you,' continued Sir
Roger.

'I will do what I can,' said the doctor.  'What I can do I will do. But
he is not a child, Scatcherd: at his age he must stand or fall mainly
by his own conduct.  The best thing for him will be to marry.'

'Exactly; that's just it, Thorne: I was coming to that.  If he would
marry, I think he would do well yet, for all that has come and gone. If
he married, of course you would let him have the command of his own
income.'

'I will be governed entirely by your wishes: under any circumstances
his income will, as I understand, be quite sufficient for him, married
or single.'

'Ah!--but, Thorne, I should like to think he should shine with the best
of them.  For what I have made the money for if not for that?  Now if
he marries--decently, that is--some woman you know that can assist him in
the world, let him have what he wants.  It is not to save the money
that I have put it into your hands.'

'No, Scatcherd; not to save the money, but to save him.  I think that
while you are yet with him you should advise him to marry.'

'He does not care a straw for what I advise, not one straw.  Why should
he?  How can I tell him to be sober when I have been a beast all my
life?  How can I advise him?  That's where it is!  It is that that now
kills me.  Advise!  Why, when I speak to him he treats me like a
child.'

'He fears that you are too weak, you know: he thinks that you should
not be allowed to talk.'

'Nonsense!  he knows better; you know better.  Too weak!  what
signifies?  Would I not give all that I have of strength at one blow if
I could open his eyes to see as I see but for one minute?'  And the
sick man raised himself in his bed as though he were actually going to
expend all that remained to him of vigour in the energy of the moment.

'Gently, Scatcherd; gently.  He will listen to you yet; but do not be
so unruly.'

'Thorne, you see that bottle there?  Give me half a glass of brandy.'

The doctor turned round in his chair; but he hesitated in doing as he
was desired.

'Do as I ask you, doctor.  It can do no harm now; you know that well
enough.  Why torture me now?'

'No, I will not torture you; but you will have water with it?'

'Water!  No; the brandy by itself.  I tell you I cannot speak without
it.  What's the use of canting now?  You know it can make no
difference.'

Sir Roger was right.  It could make no difference; and Dr Thorne gave
him the half glass of brandy.

'Ah, well; you've a stingy hand, doctor; confounded stingy.  You don't
measure your medicines out in such light doses.'

'You will be wanting more before morning, you know.'

'Before morning!  indeed I shall; a pint or two before that. I remember
the time, doctor, when I have drunk to my own cheek above two quarts
between dinner and breakfast!  aye, and worked all day after it!'

'You have been a wonderful man, Scatcherd, very wonderful.'

'Aye, wonderful!  well, never mind.  It's over now.  But what was I
saying?--about Louis, doctor; you'll not desert him?'

'Certainly not.'

'He's not strong; I know that.  How should he be strong, living as he
has done?  Not that it seemed to hurt me when I was his age.'

'You had the advantage of hard work.'

'That's it.  Sometimes I wish that Louis had not a shilling in the
world; that he had to trudge about with an apron round his waist as I
did.  But it's too late now to think of that. If he would marry,
doctor.'

Dr Thorne again expressed an opinion that no step would be so likely to
reform the habits of the young heir as marriage; and repeated his
advice to the father to implore his son to take a wife.

'I'll tell you what, Thorne,' said he.  And then, after a pause, he
went on.  'I have not half told you as yet what is on my mind; and I'm
nearly afraid to tell it; though, indeed, I don't know what I should
be.'

'I never knew you afraid of anything yet,' said the doctor, smiling
gently.

'Well, then, I'll not end by turning coward.  Now, doctor, tell the
truth to me; what do you expect me to do for that girl of yours that we
were talking of--Mary's child?'

There was a pause for a moment, for Thorne was slow to answer him.

'You would not let me see her, you know, though she is my niece as
truly as yours.'

'Nothing,' at last said the doctor, slowly.  'I expect nothing. I would
not let you see her, and therefore, I expect nothing.'

'She will have it all if poor Louis should die,' said Sir Roger.

'If you intend it so you should put her name into the will,' said the
other.  'Not that I ask you or wish you to do so.  Mary, thank God, can
do without wealth.'

'Thorne, on one condition I will put her name into it.  I will alter it
on one condition.  Let the two cousins be man and wife--let Louis marry
poor Mary's child.'

The proposition for a moment took away the doctor's breath, and he was
unable to answer.  Not for all the wealth of India would he have given
up his lamb to that young wolf, even though he had had the power to do
so.  But that lamb--lamb though she was--had, as he well knew, a will of
her own on such a matter. What alliance could be more impossible, 
thought he to himself, than one between Mary Thorne and Louis 
Scatcherd?

'I will alter it all if you will give me your hand upon it that you
will do your best to bring about this marriage.  Everything shall be
his on the day he marries her; and should he die unmarried, it shall
all then be hers by name.  Say the word, Thorne, and she shall come
here at once.  I shall yet have time to see her.'

But Dr Thorne did not say the word; just at the moment he said nothing,
but he slowly shook his head.

'Why not, Thorne?'

'My friend, it is impossible.'

'Why impossible?'

'Her hand is not mine to dispose of, nor is her heart.'

'Then let her come over herself.'

'What!  Scatcherd, that the son might make love to her while the father
is so dangerously ill!  Bid her come to look for a rich husband!  That
would not be seemly, would it?'

'No; not for that: let her come merely that I may see her; that we may
all know her.  I will leave the matter then in your hands if you will
promise me to do your best.'

'But, my friend, in this matter I cannot do my best.  I can do
nothing.  And, indeed, I may say at once, that it is altogether out of
the question.  I know--' 

'What do you know?' said the baronet, turning on him almost angrily. 
'What can you know to make you say that it is impossible?  Is she a
pearl of such price that a man may not win her?'

'She is a pearl of great price.'

'Believe me, doctor, money goes far in winning such pearls.'

'Perhaps so; I know little about it.  But this I do know, that money
will not win her.  Let us talk of something else; believe me, it is
useless for us to think of this.'

'Yes; if you set your face against it obstinately.  You must think very
poorly of Louis if you suppose that no girl can fancy him.'

'I have not said so, Scatcherd.'

'To have the spending of ten thousand a year, and be a baronet's lady! 
Why, doctor, what is it you expect for this girl?'

'Not much, indeed; not much.  A quiet heart and a quiet home; not much
more.'

'Thorne, if you will be ruled by me in this, she shall be the most
topping woman in this county.'

'My friend, my friend, why thus grieve me?  Why should you thus harass
yourself?  I tell you it is impossible.  They have never seen each
other; they have nothing, and can have nothing in common; their tastes,
and wishes, and pursuits are different. Besides, Scatcherd, marriages
never answer that are so made; believe me, it is impossible.'

The contractor threw himself back on his bed, and lay for some ten
minutes perfectly quiet; so much so that the doctor began to think that
he was sleeping.  So thinking, and wearied by the watching, Dr Thorne
was beginning to creep quietly from the room, when his companion again
roused himself, almost with vehemence.

'You won't do this thing for me, then?' said he.

'Do it!  It is not for you or me to do such things as that.  Such
things must be left to those concerned themselves.'

'You will not even help me?'

'Not in this thing, Sir Roger.'

'Then by --, she shall not under any circumstances ever have a shilling
of mine.  Give me some of that stuff there,' and he again pointed to
the brandy bottle which stood ever within his sight.'

The doctor poured out and handed to him another small modicum of
spirit.

'Nonsense, man; fill the glass.  I'll stand no nonsense now. I'll be
master of my own house to the last.  Give it here, I tell you.  Ten
thousand devils are tearing me within.  You--you could have comforted
me; but you would not.  Fill the glass I tell you.'

'I should be killing you were I to do it.'

'Killing me!  killing me!  you are always talking of killing me.  Do
you suppose that I am afraid to die?  Do not I know how soon it is
coming?  Give me the brandy, I say, or I will be out across the room to
fetch it.'

'No, Scatcherd.  I cannot give it to you; not while I am here. Do you
remember how you were engaged this morning?'--he had that morning taken
the sacrament from the parish clergyman--'you would not wish to make me
guilty of murder, would you?'

'Nonsense!  You are talking nonsense; habit is second nature. I tell
you I shall sink without it.  Why, you know, I always get it directly
your back it turned.  Come, I will not be bullied in my own house; give
me that bottle, I say!'--and Sir Roger essayed, vainly enough, to raise
himself from the bed.

'Stop, Scatcherd; I will give it to you--I will help you.  It may be
that habit is second nature.'  Sir Roger in his determined energy had
swallowed, without thinking of it, the small quantity which the doctor
had before poured out for him, and still held the empty glass within
his hand.  This the doctor now took and filled nearly to the brim.

'Come, Thorne, a bumper; a bumper for this once.  "Whatever the drink,
it a bumper must be."  You stingy fellow!  I would not treat you so. 
Well--well.'

'It's about as full as you can hold it, Scatcherd.'

'Try me; try me!  my hand is a rock; at least at holding liquor.'  And
then he drained the contents of the glass, which were in sufficient
quantity to have taken away the breath of any ordinary man.

'Ah, I'm better now.  But, Thorne, I do love a full glass, ha! ha! ha!'

There was something frightful, almost sickening, in the peculiar hoarse
guttural tone of his voice.  The sounds came from him as though steeped
in brandy, and told, all too plainly, the havoc which the alcohol had
made.  There was a fire too about his eyes which contrasted with his
sunken cheeks: his hanging jaw, unshorn beard, and haggard face were 
terrible to look at.  His hands and arms were hot and clammy, but so
thin and wasted!  Of his lower limbs the lost use had not returned to
him, so that in all his efforts at vehemence he was controlled by his
own want of vitality.  When he supported himself, half-sitting against
the pillows, he was in a continual tremor; and yet, as he boasted, he
could still lift his glass steadily to his mouth.  Such now was the
hero of whom that ready compiler of memoirs had just finished his 
correct and succinct account.

After he had had his brandy, he sat glaring a while at vacancy, as
though he was dead to all around him, and was 
thinking--thinking--thinking of things in the infinite distance of the
past.

'Shall I go now,' said the doctor, 'and send Lady Scatcherd to you?'

'Wait a while, doctor; just one minute longer.  So you will do nothing
for Louis, then?'

'I will do everything for him that I can do.'

'Ah, yes!  everything but the one thing that will save him.  Well, I
will not ask you again.  But remember, Thorne, I shall alter my will
to-morrow.'

'Do so, by all means; you may well alter it for the better.  If I may
advise you, you will have down your own business attorney from London. 
If you will let me send he will be here before to-morrow night.'

'Thank you for nothing, Thorne: I can manage that matter myself.  Now
leave me; but remember, you have ruined that girl's fortune.'

The doctor did leave him, and went not altogether happy to his room. He
could not but confess to himself that he had, despite himself as it
were, fed himself with hope that Mary's future might be made more
secure, aye, and brighter too, by some small unheeded fraction broken
off from the huge mass of her uncle's wealth.  Such hope, if it had
amounted to hope, was now all gone.  But this was not all, nor was this
the worst of it.  That he had done right in utterly repudiating all
idea of a marriage between Mary and her cousin--of that he was certain
enough; that no earthly consideration would have induced Mary to plight
her troth to such a man--that, with him, was as certain as doom.  But
how far had he done right in keeping her from the sight of her uncle? 
How could he justify it to himself if he had thus robbed her of her 
inheritance, seeing that he had done so from a selfish fear lest she,
who was now all his own, should be known to the world as belonging to
others rather than to him?  He had taken upon him on her behalf to
reject wealth as valueless; and yet he had no sooner done so than he
began to consume his hours with reflecting how great to her would be
the value of wealth.  And thus, when Sir Roger told him, as he left the
room, that he had ruined Mary's fortune, he was hardly able to bear the
taunt with equanimity.

On the next morning, after paying his professional visit to his
patient, and satisfying himself that the end was now drawing near with
steps terribly quickened, he went down to Greshamsbury.

'How long is this to last, uncle?' said his niece, with sad voice, as
he again prepared to return to Boxall Hill.

'Not long, Mary; do not begrudge him a few more hours of life.'

'No, I do not, uncle.  I will say nothing more about it.  Is his son
with him?'  And then, perversely enough, she persisted in asking
numerous questions about Louis Scatcherd.

'Is he likely to marry, uncle?'

'I hope so, my dear.'

'Will he be so very rich?'

'Yes; ultimately he will be very rich.'

'He will be a baronet, will he not?'

'Yes, my dear.'

'What is he like, uncle?'

'Like--I never know what a young man is like.  He is like a man with red
hair.'

'Uncle, you are the worst hand in describing I ever knew.  If I'd seen
him for five minutes, I'd be bound to make a portrait of him; and you,
if you were describing a dog, you'd only say what colour his hair was.'

'Well, he's a little man.'

'Exactly, just as I should say that Mrs Umbleby had a red-haired
little dog.  I wish I had known these Scatcherds, uncle. I do admire
people that can push themselves in the world.  I wish I had known Sir
Roger.'

'You will never know him, Mary.'

'I suppose not.  I am so sorry for him.  Is Lady Scatcherd nice?'

'She is an excellent woman.'

'I hope I may know her some day.  You are so much there now, uncle; I
wonder whether you ever mention me to them.  If you do, tell her from
me how much I grieve for her.'

That same night, Dr Thorne again found himself alone with Sir Roger. 
The sick man was much more tranquil, and apparently more at ease than
he had been on the preceding night.  He said nothing about his will,
and not a word about Mary Thorne; but the doctor knew that Winterbones
and a notary's clerk from Barchester had been in the bedroom a great
part of the day; and, as he knew also that the great man of business 
was accustomed to do his most important work by the hands of such tools
as these, he did not doubt but that the will had been altered and
remodelled.  Indeed, he thought it more than probable, that when it was
opened it would be found to be wholly different in its provisions from
that which Sir Roger had already described.

'Louis is clever enough,' he said, 'sharp enough, I mean.  He won't
squander the property.'

'He has good natural abilities,' said the doctor.

'Excellent, excellent,' said the father.  'He may do well, very well,
if he can only be kept from this;' and Sir Roger held up the empty
wine-glass which stood by his bedside.  'What a life he may have before
him!--and to throw it away for this!' and as he spoke he took the glass
and tossed it across the room.  'Oh, doctor!  would that it were all to
begin again!'

'We all wish that, I dare say, Scatcherd.'

'No, you don't wish it.  You ain't worth a shilling, and yet you regret
nothing.  I am worth half a million in one way or another, and I regret
everything-everything--everything!'

'You should not think that way, Scatcherd; you need not think so. 
Yesterday you told Mr Clarke that you were comfortable in your mind.'
Mr Clarke was the clergyman who had visited him.

'Of course I did.  What else could I say when he asked me?  It wouldn't
have been civil to have told him that his time and words were all
thrown away.  But, Thorne, believe me, when a man's heart is
sad--sad--sad to the core, a few words from a parson at the last moment
will never make it right.'

'May He have mercy on you, my friend!--if you will think of Him, and
look to Him, He will have mercy on you.'

'Well--I will try, doctor; but would that it were all to do again. 
You'll see to the old woman for my sake, won't you?'

'What, Lady Scatcherd?'

'Lady Devil!  If anything angers me now it is that "ladyship"--her to be
my lady!  Why, when I came out of jail that time, the poor creature had
hardly a shoe to her foot.  But it wasn't her fault, Thorne; it was
none of her doing.  She never asked for such nonsense.'

'She has been an excellent wife, Scatcherd; and what is more, she is an
excellent woman.  She is, and ever will be, one of my dearest friends.'

'Thank'ee, doctor, thank'ee.  Yes; she has been a good wife--better for
a poor man than a rich one; but then, that was what she was born to. 
You won't let her be knocked about by them, will you, Thorne?'

Dr Thorne again assured him, that as long as he lived Lady Scatcherd
should never want one true friend; in making this promise, however, he
managed to drop all allusion to the obnoxious title.

'You'll be with him as much as possible, won't you?' again asked the
baronet, after lying quite silent for a quarter of an hour.

'With whom?' said the doctor, who was then all but asleep.

'With my poor boy, Louis.'

'If he will let me, I will,' said the doctor.

'And, doctor, when you see a glass at his mouth, dash it down; thrust
it down, though you thrust out the teeth with it.  When you see that,
Thorne, tell him of his father--tell him what his father might have been
but for that; tell him how his father died like a beast, because he
could not keep himself from drink.'

These, reader, were the last words spoken by Sir Roger Scatcherd.  As
he uttered them he rose up in bed with the same vehemence which he had
shown on the former evening.  But in the very act of doing so he was
again struck by paralysis, and before nine on the following morning all
was over. 

'Oh, my man--my own, own man!' exclaimed the widow, remembering in the
paroxysm of her grief nothing but the loves of their early days; 'the
best, the brightest, the cleverest of them all!'

Some weeks after this Sir Roger was buried, with much pomp and
ceremony, within the precincts of Barchester Cathedral; and a monument
was put up to him soon after, in which he was portrayed, as smoothing a
block of granite with a mallet and chisel; while his eagle eye,
disdaining such humble work, was fixed upon some intricate mathematical
instrument above him. Could Sir Roger have seen it himself, he would
probably have declared, that no workman was ever worth his salt who
looked one way while he rowed another.

Immediately after the funeral the will was opened, and Dr Thorne
discovered that the clauses of it were exactly identical with those his
friend had described to him some months back.  Nothing had been
altered; nor had the document been unfolded since that strange codicil
had been added, in which it was declared that Dr Thorne knew--and only
Dr Thorne--who was the eldest child of the testator's only sister.  At 
the same time, however, a joint executor with Dr Thorne had been
named--one Mr Stock, a man of railway fame--and Dr Thorne himself was
made a legatee to the humble extent of a thousand pounds.  A life
income of a thousand pounds a year was left to Lady Scatcherd.



CHAPTER XXVI

WAR

We need not follow Sir Roger to his grave, nor partake of the baked
meats which were furnished for his funeral banquet.  Such men as Sir
Roger Scatcherd are always well buried, and we have already seen that
his glories were duly told to posterity in the graphic diction of his
sepulchral monument. In a few days the doctor had returned to his quite
home and Sir Louis found himself reigning at Boxall Hill in his 
father's stead--with, however, a much diminished sway, and, as he
thought it, but a poor exchequer.  We must soon return to him and say
something of his career as a baronet; but for the present, we may go
back to our more pleasant friends at Greshamsbury.

But our friends at Greshamsbury had not been making themselves
pleasant--not so pleasant to each other as circumstances would have
admitted.  In those days which the doctor had felt himself bound to
pass, if not altogether at Boxall Hill, yet altogether away from his
own home, so as to admit of his being as much as possible with his
patient, Mary had been thrown more than ever with Patience Oriel, and, 
also, almost more than ever with Beatrice Gresham.  As regarded Mary,
she would doubtless have preferred the companionship of Patience,
though she loved Beatrice far the best; but she had no choice.  When
she went to the parsonage Beatrice came there also, and when Patience
came to the doctor's house Beatrice either accompanied or followed
her.  Mary could hardly have rejected their society, even had she felt
it wise to do so.  She would in such case have been all alone, and her
severance from the Greshamsbury house and household, from the big
family in which she had for so many years been almost at home, would
have made such solitude almost unendurable.

And then these two girls both knew--not her secret; she had no 
secret--but the little history of her ill-treatment.  They knew that
though she had been blameless in this matter, yet she had been the one
to bear the punishment; and, as girls and bosom friends, they could not
but sympathize with her, and endow her with heroic attributes; make
her, in fact, as we are doing, their little heroine for the nonce. This
was, perhaps, not serviceable for Mary; but it was far from being 
disagreeable.

The tendency to finding matter for hero-worship in Mary's endurance was
much stronger with Beatrice than with Miss Oriel. Miss Oriel was the
elder, and naturally less afflicted with the sentimentation of
romance.  She had thrown herself into Mary's arms because she had seen
that it was essentially necessary for Mary's comfort that she should do
so.  She was anxious to make her friend smile, and to smile with her.  
Beatrice was quite as true in her sympathy; but she rather wished that
she and Mary might weep in unison, shed mutual tears, and break their
hearts together.

Patience had spoken of Frank's love as a misfortune, of his conduct as
erroneous, and to be excused only by his youth, and had never appeared
to surmise that Mary also might be in love as well as he.  But to
Beatrice the affair was a tragic difficulty, admitting of no solution;
a Gordian knot, not to be cut; a misery now and for ever.  She would
always talk about Frank when she and Mary were alone; and, to speak the
truth, Mary did not stop her as she perhaps should have done. 

As for a marriage between them, that was impossible; Beatrice was well
sure of that: it was Frank's unfortunate destiny that he must marry
money--money, and, as Beatrice sometimes thoughtlessly added, cutting
Mary to the quick,--money and family also.  Under such circumstances a
marriage between them was quite impossible; but not the less did 
Beatrice declare, that she would have loved Mary as her sister-in-law
had it been possible; and how worthy Frank was of a girl's love, had
such love been possible.

'It is so cruel,' Beatrice would say; 'so very, very, cruel. 
 You would have suited him in every way.'

'Nonsense, Trichy; I should have suited him in no possible way at all;
nor he me.'

'Oh, but you would--exactly.  Papa loves you so well.'

'And mamma; that would have been so nice.'

'Yes; and mamma, too--that is, had you had a fortune,' said the
daughter, naively.  'She always liked you personally, always.'

'Did she?'

'Always.  And we all love you so.'

'Especially Lady Alexandrina.'

'That would not have signified, for Frank cannot endure the De Courcys
himself.'

'My dear, it does not matter one straw whom your brother can endure or
not endure just at present.  His character is to be formed, and his
tastes, and his heart also.'

'Oh, Mary!--his heart.'

'Yes, his heart; not the fact of his having a heart.  I think he has a
heart; but he himself does not yet understand it.'

'Oh, Mary!  you do not know him.'

Such conversations were not without danger to poor Mary's comfort.  It
came soon to be the case that she looked rather for this sort of
sympathy from Beatrice, than for Miss Oriel's pleasant but less piquant
gaiety.

So the days of the doctor's absence were passed, and so also the first
week after his return.  During this week it was almost daily necessary
that the squire should be with him.  The doctor was now the legal
holder of Sir Roger's property, and, as such, the holder also of all
the mortgages on Mr Gresham's property; and it was natural that they
should be much together. The doctor would not, however, go up to 
Greshamsbury on any other than medical business; and it therefore
became necessary that the squire should be a good deal at the doctor's
house.

Then the Lady Arabella became unhappy in her mind.  Frank, it was true,
was away at Cambridge, and had been successfully kept out of Mary's way
since the suspicion of danger had fallen upon Lady Arabella's mind. 
Frank was away, and Mary was systematically banished, with due
acknowledgement from all the powers in Greshamsbury.  But this was not
enough for Lady Arabella as long as her daughter still habitually 
consorted with the female culprit, and as long as her husband consorted
with the male culprit.  It seemed to Lady Arabella at this moment as
though, in banishing Mary from the house, she had in effect banished
h