erself from the most intimate of the Greshamsbury social circles.  She
magnified in her own mind the importance of the conferences between the
girls, and was not without some fear that the doctor might be talking 
the squire over into very dangerous compliance.

Her object was to break of all confidential intercourse between
Beatrice and Mary, and to interrupt, as far as she could do it, that
between the doctor and the squire.  This, it may be said, could be more
easily done by skilful management within her own household.  She had,
however, tried that and failed.  She had said much to Beatrice as to
the imprudence of her friendship with Mary, and she had done this 
purposely before the squire; injudiciously however--for the squire had
immediately taken Mary's part, and had declared that he had no wish to
see a quarrel between his family and that of the doctor; that Mary
Thorne was in every way a good girl, and an eligible friend for his own
child; and had ended by declaring, that he would not have Mary
persecuted for Frank's fault.  This had not been the end, nor nearly
the end of what had been said on the matter at Greshamsbury; but the 
end, when it came, came in this wise, that Lady Arabella determined to
say a few words to the doctor as to the expediency of forbidding
familiar intercourse between Mary and any of the Greshamsbury people.

With this view Lady Arabella absolutely bearded the lion in his den,
the doctor in his shop.  She had heard that both Mary and Beatrice were
to pass a certain afternoon at the parsonage, and took that opportunity
of calling at the doctor's house.  A period of many years had passed
since she had last so honoured that abode.  Mary, indeed, had been so 
much one of her own family that the ceremony of calling on her had
never been thought necessary; and thus, unless Mary had been absolutely
ill, there would have been nothing to bring her ladyship to the house. 
All this she knew would add to the importance of the occasion, and she
judged it prudent to make the occasion as important as it might well
be.

She was so far successful that she soon found herself tete-a-tete with
the doctor in his own study.  She was no whit dismayed by the pair of
human thigh-bones which lay close to his hand, and which, when he was
talking in that den of his own, he was in the constant habit of
handling with much energy; nor was she frightened out of her propriety
even by the little child's skull which grinned at her from off the 
chimney-piece.

'Doctor,' she said, as soon as the first complimentary greetings were
over, speaking in her kindest and most would-be-confidential tone. 
'Doctor, I am still uneasy about that boy of mine, and I have thought
it best to come and see you at once, and tell you freely what I think.'

The doctor bowed, and said that he was very sorry that she should have
any cause for uneasiness about his young friend Frank.

'Indeed, I am very uneasy, doctor; and having, as I do have, such
reliance on your prudence, and such perfect confidence in your
friendship, I have thought it best to come and speak to you openly:'
thereupon the Lady Arabella paused, and the doctor bowed again.

'Nobody knows so well as you do the dreadful state of the squire's
affairs.'

'Not so dreadful; not so very dreadful,' said the doctor, mildly: 'that
is, as far as I know.'

'Yes they are, doctor; very dreadful; very dreadful indeed.  You know
how much he owes to this young man: I do not, for the squire never
tells anything to me; but I know that it is a very large sum of money;
enough to swamp the estate and ruin Frank. Now I call that very
dreadful.'

'No, not ruin him, Lady Arabella; not ruin him, I hope.'

'However, I did not come to talk to you about that.  As I said before,
I know nothing of the squire's affairs, and, as a matter of course, I
do not ask you to tell me.  But I am sure you will agree with me in
this that, as a mother, I cannot but be interested about my only son,'
and Lady Arabella put her cambric handkerchief to her eyes.

'Of course you are; of course you are,' said the doctor; 'and, Lady
Arabella, my opinion of Frank is such, that I feel sure that he will do
well;' and, in his energy, Dr Thorne brandished one of the thigh-bones
almost in the lady's face.

'I hope he will; I am sure I hope he will.  But, doctor, he has such
dangers to contend with; he is so warm and impulsive that I fear his
heart will bring him into trouble.  Now, you know, unless Frank marries
money he is lost.'

The doctor made no answer to this last appeal, but as he sat and
listened a slight frown came across his brow.

'He must marry money, doctor.  Now we have, you see, with your
assistance, contrived to separate him from dear Mary--'

'With my assistance, Lady Arabella!  I have given no assistance, nor
have I meddled in the matter; nor will I.'

'Well, doctor, perhaps not meddled; but you agreed with me, you know,
that the two young people had been imprudent.'

'I agreed to no such thing, Lady Arabella; never, never.  I not only
never agreed that Mary had been imprudent, but I will not agree to it
now, and will not allow any one to assert it in my presence without
contradicting it:' and then the doctor worked away at the thigh-bones
in a manner that did rather alarm her ladyship.

'At any rate, you thought that the young people had better be kept
apart.'

'No; neither did I think that: my niece, I felt sure, was safe from
danger.  I knew that she would do nothing that would bring either her
or me to shame.'

'Not to shame,' said the lady apologetically, as it were, using the
word perhaps not exactly in the doctor's sense.

'I felt no alarm for her,' continued the doctor, 'and desired no
change.  Frank is your son, and it is for you to look to him.  You
thought proper to do so by desiring Mary to absent herself from
Greshamsbury.'

'Oh, no, no, no!' said Lady Arabella.

'But you did, Lady Arabella; and as Greshamsbury is your home, neither
I nor my niece had any ground of complaint.  We acquiesced, not without
much suffering, but we did acquiesce; and you, I think, can have no
ground of complaint against me.'

Lady Arabella had hardly expected that the doctor would reply to her
mild and conciliatory exordium with so much sternness. He had yielded
so easily to her on the former occasion.  She did not comprehend that
when she uttered her sentence of exile against Mary, she had given an
order which she had the power of enforcing; but that obedience to that
order had now placed Mary altogether beyond her jurisdiction.  She was,
therefore, a little surprised, and for a few moments overawed by the
doctor's manner; but she soon recovered herself, remembering,
doubtless, that fortune favours none but the brave.

'I make no complaint, Dr Thorne,' she said, after assuming a tone more
befitting a De Courcy than that hitherto used, 'I make no complaint
either as regards you or Mary.'

'You are very kind, Lady Arabella.'

'But I think that it is my duty to put a stop, a peremptory stop to
anything like a love affair between my son and your niece.'

'I have not the least objection in life.  If there is such a love
affair, put a stop to it--that is, if you have the power.'

Here the doctor was doubtless imprudent.  But he had begun to think
that he had yielded sufficiently to the lady; and he had begun to
resolve, also, that though it would not become him to encourage even
the idea of such a marriage, he would make Lady Arabella understand
that he thought his niece quite good enough for her son, and that the
match, if regarded as imprudent, was to be regarded as equally
imprudent on both sides.  He would not suffer that Mary and her heart
and feelings and interest should be altogether postponed to those of
the young heir; and, perhaps, he was unconsciously encouraged in this
determination by the reflection that Mary herself might perhaps become
a young heiress.

'It is my duty,' said Lady Arabella, repeating her words with even a
stronger De Courcy intonation; 'and your duty also, Dr Thorne.'

'My duty!' said he, rising from his chair and leaning on the table with
the two thigh-bones.  'Lady Arabella, pray understand at once, that I
repudiate any such duty, and will have nothing whatever to do with it.'

'But you do not mean to say that you will encourage this unfortunate
boy to marry your niece?'

'The unfortunate boy, Lady Arabella--whom, by the by, I regard as a very
fortunate young man--is your son, not mine.  I shall take no steps about
his marriage, either one way or the other.'

'You think it right, then, that your niece should throw herself in his
way?'

'Throw herself in his way!  What would you say if I came up to
Greshamsbury, and spoke of your daughters in such language?  What would
my dear friend, Mr Gresham say, if some neighbour's wife should come
and so speak to him?  I will tell you what he would say: he would
quietly beg her to go back to her own home and meddle only with her own
matters.'

This was dreadful to Lady Arabella.  Even Dr Thorne had never before
dared thus to lower her to the level of common humanity, and liken her
to any other wife in the country-side.  Moreover, she was not quite
sure whether he, the parish doctor, was not desiring her, the earl's
daughter, to go home and mind her own business.  On this first point, 
however, there seemed to be no room for doubt, of which she gave
herself the benefit.

'It would not become me to argue with you, Dr Thorne,' she said.

'Not at least on this subject,' said he.

'I can only repeat that I mean nothing offensive to our dear Mary; for
whom, I think I may say, I have always shown almost a mother's care.'

'Neither am I, nor is Mary, ungrateful for the kindness she has
received at Greshamsbury.'

'But I must do my duty: my own children must be my first 
consideration.'

'Of course they must, Lady Arabella; that's of course.'

'And, therefore, I have called on you to say that I think it is
imprudent that Beatrice and Mary should be so much together.'

The doctor had been standing during the latter part of this 
conversation, but now he began to walk about, still holding the  two
bones like a pair of dumb-bells.

'God bless my soul!' he said; 'God bless my soul!  Why, Lady Arabella,
do you suspect your own daughter as well as your own son?  Do you think
that Beatrice is assisting Mary in preparing this wicked clandestine
marriage?  I tell you fairly, Lady Arabella, the present tone of your
mind is such that I cannot understand it.'

'I suspect nobody, Dr Thorne; but young people will be young.'

'And old people must be old, I suppose; the more's the pity. Lady
Arabella, Mary is the same to me as my own daughter, and owes me the
obedience of a child; but as I do not disapprove of your daughter
Beatrice as an acquaintance for her, but rather, on the other hand,
regard with pleasure their friendship, you cannot expect that I should
take any steps to put an end to it.'

'But suppose it should lead to renewed intercourse between Frank and
Mary?'

'I have no objection.  Frank is a very nice young fellow, gentlemanlike
in his manners, and neighbourly in his disposition.'

'Dr Thorne--'

'Lady Arabella--'

'I cannot believe that you really intend to express a wish--'

'You are quite right.  I have not intended to express any wish; nor do
I intend to do so.  Mary is at liberty, within certain bounds--which I
am sure she will not pass--to choose her own friends.  I think she has
not chosen badly as regards Miss Beatrice Gresham; and should she even
add Frank Gresham to the number--'

'Friends!  why they were more than friends; they were declared lovers.'

'I doubt that, Lady Arabella, because I have not heard of it from
Mary.  But even if it were so, I do not see why I should object.'

'Not object!'

'As I said before, Frank is, to my thinking, an excellent young man. 
Why should I object?'

'Dr Thorne!' said her ladyship, now also rising from her chair in a
state of too evident perturbation.

'Why should I object?  It is for you, Lady Arabella, to look after your
lambs; for me to see that, if possible, no harm shall come to mine.  If
you think that Mary is an improper acquaintance for your children, it
is for you to guide them; for you and their father.  Say what you think
fit to your own daughter; but pray understand, once for all, that I
will allow no one to interfere with my niece.'

'Interfere!' said Lady Arabella, now absolutely confused by the
severity of the doctor's manner.

'I will allow no one to interfere with her; no one, Lady Arabella.  She
has suffered very greatly from imputations which you have most unjustly
thrown on her.  It was, however, your undoubted right to turn her out
of your house if you thought fit;--though, as a woman who had known her
for so many years, you might, I think, have treated her with more 
forbearance.  That, however, was your right, and you exercised it. 
There your privilege stops; yes, and must stop, Lady Arabella.  You
shall not persecute her here, on the only spot of ground she can call
her own.'

'Persecute her, Dr Thorne!  You do not mean to say that I have
persecuted her?'

'Ah!  but I do mean to say so.  You do persecute her, and would
continue to do so did I not defend her.  It is not sufficient that she
is forbidden to enter your domain--and so forbidden with the knowledge
of all the country round--but you must come here also with the hope of
interrupting all the innocent pleasures of her life.  Fearing lest she
should be allowed even to speak to your son, to hear of word of him 
through his own sister, you would put her in prison, tie her up, keep
her from the light of day--'

'Dr Thorne!  how can you--'

But the doctor was not to be interrupted.

'It never occurs to you to tie him up, to put him in prison. No; he is
the heir of Greshamsbury; he is your son, an earl's grandson.  It is
only natural, after all, that he should throw a few foolish words at
the doctor's niece.  But she!  it is an offence not to be forgiven on
her part that she should, however, unwillingly, have been forced to
listen to them!  Now understand me, Lady Arabella; if any of your 
family come to my house I shall be delighted to welcome them; if Mary
should meet any of them elsewhere I shall be delighted to hear of it. 
Should she tell me to-morrow that she was engaged to marry Frank, I
should talk the matter over with her, quite coolly, solely with a view
to her interest, as would be my duty; feeling, at the same time, that
Frank would be lucky in having such a wife.  Now you know my mind, Lady
Arabella.  It is so I should do my duty;--you can do yours as you may
think fit.'

Lady Arabella had by this time perceived that she was not destined, on
this occasion to gain any great victory.  She, however, was angry as
well as the doctor.  It was not the man's vehemence that provoked her
so much as his evident determination to break down the prestige of her
rank, and place her on a footing in no respect superior to his own.  He
had never before been so audaciously arrogant; and, as she moved
towards the door, she determined in her wrath that she would never
again have confidential intercourse with him in any relation of life
whatsoever.

'Dr Thorne,' said she.  'I think you have forgotten yourself. You must
excuse me if I say that after what has passed I--I--I--'

'Certainly,' said he, fully understanding what she meant; and bowing
low as he opened first the study-door, then the front-door, then the
garden-gate.

And then the Lady Arabella stalked off, not without full observation
from Mrs Yates Umbleby and her friend Miss Gustring, who lived close
by.



CHAPTER XXVII

MISS THORNE GOES ON A VISIT

And now began the unpleasant things at Greshamsbury of which we have
here told.  When Lady Arabella walked away from the doctor's house she
resolved that, let it cost what it might, there should be war to the
knife between her and him.  She had been insulted by him--so at least
she said to herself, and so she was prepared to say to others also--and
it was not to be borne that a De Courcy should allow her parish doctor
to insult her with impunity.  She would tell her husband with all the
dignity that she could assume, that it had now become absolutely
necessary that he should protect his wife by breaking entirely with his
unmannered neighbour; and, as regarded the young members of her family,
she would use the authority of a mother, and absolutely forbid them to
hold any intercourse with Mary Thorne.  So resolving, she walked 
quickly back to her own house.

The doctor, when left alone, was not quite satisfied with the part he
had taken in the interview.  He had spoken from impulse rather than
from judgement, and, as is generally the case with men who do so speak,
he had afterwards to acknowledge to himself that he had been
imprudent.  He accused himself probably with more violence than he had 
really used, and was therefore unhappy; but, nevertheless, his
indignation was not at rest.  He was angry with himself; but not on
that account the less angry with Lady Arabella.  She was cruel of
manners, so he thought; but not on that account was he justified in
forgetting the forbearance due from a gentleman to a lady.  Mary,
moreover, had owed much to the kindness of this woman, and, therefore,
Dr Thorne felt that he should have forgiven much.

Thus the doctor walked about his room, much disturbed; now accusing
himself for having been so angry with Lady Arabella, and then feeding
his own anger by thinking of her misconduct.

The only immediate conclusion at which he resolved was this, that it
was unnecessary that he should say anything to Mary on the subject of
her ladyship's visit.  There was no doubt, sorrow enough in store for
his darling; why should he aggravate it?  Lady Arabella would doubtless
not stop now in her course; but why should he accelerate the evil which
she would doubtless be able to effect?

Lady Arabella, when she returned to the house, allowed no grass to grow
under her feet.  As she entered the house she desired that Miss
Beatrice should be sent to her directly she returned; and she desired
also, that as soon as the squire should be in his room a message to
that effect might be immediately brought to her.

'Beatrice,' she said, as soon as the young lady appeared before her,
and in speaking she assumed her firmest tone of authority, 'Beatrice, I
am sorry, my dear, to say anything that is unpleasant to you, but I
must make it a positive request that you will for the future drop all
intercourse with Dr Thorne's family.'

Beatrice, who had received Lady Arabella's message immediately on
entering the house, and had run upstairs imagining that some instant
haste was required, now stood before her mother rather out of breath,
holding her bonnet by the strings.

'Oh, mamma!' she exclaimed, 'what on earth has happened?'

'My dear,' said the mother, 'I cannot really explain to you what has
happened; but I must ask you to give me positive your assurance that
you will comply with my request.'

'You don't mean that I am not to see Mary any more?'

'Yes, I do, my dear; at any rate, for the present.  When I tell you
that your brother's interest imperatively demands it, I am sure that
you will not refuse me.'

Beatrice did not refuse, but she did not appear too willing to comply. 
She stood silent, leaning against the end of a sofa and twisting her
bonnet-strings in her hand.

'Well, Beatrice--'

'But, mamma, I don't understand.'

Lady Arabella had said that she could not exactly explain: but she
found it necessary to attempt to do so.

'Dr Thorne has openly declared to me that a marriage between poor Frank
and Mary is all he could desire for his niece.  After such unparalleled
audacity as that, even your father will see the necessity of breaking
with him.'

'Dr Thorne!  Oh, mamma, you must have misunderstood him.'

'My dear, I am not apt to misunderstand people; especially when I am so
much in earnest as I was in talking to Dr Thorne.'

'But, mamma, I know so well what Mary herself thinks about it.'

'And I know what Dr Thorne thinks about it; he, at any rate, has been
candid in what he said; there can be no doubt on earth that he has
spoken his true thoughts; there can be no reason to doubt him; of
course such a match would be all that he could wish.'

'Mamma, I feel sure that there is some mistake.'

'Very well, my dear.  I know that you are infatuated about these
people, and that you are always inclined to contradict what I say to
you; but, remember, I expect that you will obey me when I tell you not
to go to Dr Thorne's house any more.'

'But, mamma--'

'I expect you to obey me, Beatrice.  Though you are so prone to
contradict, you have never disobeyed me; and I fully trust that you
will not do so now.'

Lady Arabella had begun by exacting, or trying to exact a promise, but
as she found that this was not forthcoming, she thought it better to
give up the point without a dispute.  It might be that Beatrice would
absolutely refuse to pay this respect to her mother's authority, and
then where would she have been?

At this moment a servant came up to say that the squire was in his
room, and Lady Arabella was opportunely saved the necessity of
discussing the matter further with her daughter. 'I am now,' she said,
'going to see your father on the same subject; you may be quite sure,
Beatrice that I should not willingly speak to him on any matter
relating to Dr Thorne did I not find it absolutely necessary to do so.'

This Beatrice knew was true, and she did therefore feel convinced that
something terrible must have happened.

While Lady Arabella opened her budget the squire sat quite silent,
listening to her with appropriate respect.  She found it necessary that
her description to him should be much more elaborate than that which
she had vouchsafed to her daughter, and, in telling her grievance, she
insisted most especially on the personal insult which had been offered
to herself.

'After what has now happened,' said she, not quite able to repress a
tone of triumph as she spoke, 'I do expect, Mr Gresham, that you
will--will--'

'Will what, my dear?'

'Will at least protect me from the repetition of such treatment.'

'You are not afraid that Dr Thorne will come here and attack you?   As
far as I can understand, he never comes near the place, unless you send
for him.'

'No; I do not think that he will come to Greshamsbury any more. I
believe I have put a stop to that.'

'Then what is it, my dear, that you want me to do?'

Lady Arabella paused a minute before she replied.  The game which she
now had to play was not very easy; she knew, or thought she knew, that
her husband, in his heart of hearts, much preferred his friend to the
wife of his bosom, and that he would, if he could, shuffle out of
noticing the doctor's iniquities.  It behoved her, therefore, to put
them forward in such a way that they must be noticed.

'I suppose, Mr Gresham, you do not wish that Frank should marry the
girl?'

'I do not think there is the slightest chance of such a thing; and I am
quite sure that Dr Thorne would not encourage it.'

'But I tell you, Mr Gresham, that he says he will encourage it.'

'Oh, you misunderstand him.'

'Of course; I always misunderstand everything.  I know that. I
misunderstood it when I told you how you would distress yourself if you
took those nasty hounds.'

'I have had other troubles more expensive than the hounds,' said the
poor squire, sighing.

'Oh, yes; I know what you mean; a wife and family are expensive, of
course.  It is a little too late to complain of that.'

'My dear, it is always too late to complain of any troubles when they
are no longer to be avoided.  We need not, therefore, talk any more
about hounds at present.'

'I do not wish to speak of them, Mr Gresham.'

'Nor I.'

'But I hope you will not think me unreasonable if I am anxious to know
what you intend to do about Dr Thorne.'

'To do?'

'Yes; I suppose you will do something: you do not wish to see your son
marry such a girl as Mary Thorne.'

'As far as the girl herself is concerned,' said the squire, turning
rather red, 'I am not sure that he could do much better.  I know
nothing whatever against Mary.  Frank, however, cannot afford to make
such a match.  It would be his ruin.'

'Of course it would; utter ruin; he never could hold up his head
again.  Therefore it is I ask, What do you intend to do?'

The squire was bothered.  He had no intention whatever of doing
anything, an no belief in his wife's assertion as to Dr Thorne's
iniquity.  But he did not know how to get her out of the room.  She
asked him the same question over and over again, and on each occasion
urged on him the heinousness of the insult to which she personally had
been subjected; so that at last he was driven to ask her what it was
she wished him to do.

'Well, then, Mr Gresham, if you ask me, I must say, that I think you
should abstain from any intercourse with Dr Thorne whatever.'

'Break off all intercourse with him?'

'Yes.'

'What do you mean?  He has been turned out of this house, and I'm not
to go to see him at his own.'

'I certainly think that you ought to discontinue your visits to Dr
Thorne altogether.'

'Nonsense, my dear; absolute nonsense.'

'Nonsense!  Mr Gresham; it is no nonsense.  As you speak in that way, I
must let you know plainly what I feel.  I am endeavouring to do my duty
by my son.  As you justly observe, such a marriage as this would be
utter ruin to him.  When I found that the young people were actually
talking of being in love with each other, making vows and all that sort
of thing, I did think it time to interfere.  I did not, however, turn 
them out of Greshamsbury as you accuse me of doing.  In the kindest
possible manner--'

'Well--well--well; I know all that.  There, they are gone, and that's
enough.  I don't complain; surely that ought to be enough.'

'Enough!  Mr Gresham.  No; it is not enough.  I find that, in spite of
what has occurred, the closest intimacy exists between the two
families; that poor Beatrice, who is so very young, and not so prudent
as she should be, is made to act as a go-between; and when I speak to
the doctor, hoping that he will assist me in preventing this, he not
only tells me that he means to encourage Mary in her plans, but
positively insults me to my face, laughs at me for being an earl's 
daughter, and tells me--yes, he absolutely told me--to get out of his
house.'

Let it be told with some shame as to the squire's conduct, that his
first feeling on hearing this was one of envy--of envy and regret that
he could not make the same uncivil request.  Not that he wished to turn
his wife absolutely out of his house; but he would have been very glad
to have had the power of dismissing her summarily from his own room.  
This, however, was at present impossible; so he was obliged to make
some mild reply.

'You must have mistaken him, my dear.  He could not have intended to
say that.'

'Oh!  of course, Mr Gresham.  It is a mistake, of course.  It will be a
mistake, only a mistake when you find your son married to Mary Thorne.'

'Well, my dear, I cannot undertake to quarrel with Dr Thorne.' This was
true; for the squire could hardly have quarrelled with Dr Thorne, even
had he wished it.

'Then I think it right to tell you that I shall.  And, Mr Gresham, I
did not expect much co-operation from you; but I did think that you
would have shown some little anger when you heard that I had been so
ill-treated.  I shall, however, know how to take care of myself; and I
shall continue to do the best I can to protect Frank from these wicked
intrigues.'

So saying, her ladyship arose and left the room, having succeeded in
destroying to comfort of all our Greshamsbury friends.  It was very
well for the squire to declare that he would not quarrel with Dr
Thorne, and of course he did not do so.  But he, himself, had no wish
whatever that his son should marry Mary Thorne; and as a falling drop
will hollow a stone, so did the continual harping of his wife on the 
subject give rise to some amount of suspicion in his own mind.  Then as
to Beatrice, though she had made no promise that she would not again
visit Mary, she was by no means prepared to set her mother's authority
altogether at defiance; and she also was sufficiently uncomfortable.

Dr Thorne said nothing of the matter to his niece, and she, therefore,
would have been absolutely bewildered by Beatrice's absence, had she
not received some tidings of what had taken place at Greshamsbury
through Patience Oriel.  Beatrice and Patience discussed the matter
fully, and it was agreed between them that it would be better that Mary
should know what sterner orders respecting her had gone forth from the
tyrant at Greshamsbury, and that she might understand that Beatrice's
absence was compulsory.  Patience was thus placed in this position,
that on one day she walked and talked with Beatrice, and on the next
with Mary; and so matters went on for a while at Greshamsbury--not very 
pleasantly.

Very unpleasantly and very uncomfortably did the months of May and June
pass away.  Beatrice and Mary occasionally met, drinking tea together
at the parsonage, or in some other of the ordinary meetings of the
country society; but there were no more confidentially distressing
confidential discourses, no more whispering of Frank's name, no more
sweet allusions to the inexpediency of a passion, which, according to 
Beatrice's views, would have been so delightful had it been expedient.

The squire and the doctor also met constantly; there were unfortunately
many subjects on which they were obliged to meet. Louis Philippe--or Sir
Louis as we must call him--though he had no power over his own property,
was wide awake to all the coming privileges of ownership, and he would
constantly point out to his guardian the manner in which, according to 
his ideas, the most should be made of it.  The young baronet's ideas of
good taste were not of the most refined description, and he did not
hesitate to tell Dr Thorne that his, the doctor's friendship with Mr
Gresham must be no bar to his, the baronet's interest.  Sir Louis also
had his own lawyer, who gave Dr Thorne to understand, that, according
to his ideas, the sum due on Mr Gresham's property was too large to be
left on its present footing; the title-deeds, he said, should be
surrendered or the mortgage foreclosed.  All this added to the sadness
which now seemed to envelop the village of Greshamsbury.

Early in July Frank was to come home.  The manner in which the comings
and goings of 'poor Frank' were allowed to disturb the arrangements of
all the ladies, and some of the gentlemen, of Greshamsbury was most
abominable.  And yet it can hardly be said to have been his fault.  He
would have been only too well pleased had things been allowed to go on 
after their old fashion.  Things were not allowed so to go on.  At
Christmas Miss Oriel had submitted to be exiled, in order that she
might carry Mary away from the presence of the young Bashaw, an
arrangement by which all the winter festivities of the poor doctor had
been thoroughly sacrificed; and now it began to be said that some
similar plan for the summer must be arranged.

It must not be supposed that any direction to this effect was conveyed
either to Mary or to the doctor. The suggestion came from them, and was
mentioned only to Patience. But Patience, as a matter of course, told
Beatrice, and Beatrice told her mother, somewhat triumphantly, hoping
thereby to convince the she-dragon of Mary's innocence. Alas!
she-dragons are not easily convinced of the innocence of any one. Lady
Arabella quite coincided the propriety of Mary's being sent
off,--whither she never inquired,--in order that the coast might be
clear for 'poor Frank'; but she did not a whit the more abstain from
talking of the wicked intrigues of those Thornes. As it turned out,
Mary's absence caused her to talk all the more.

The Boxall Hill property, including the house and furniture, had been
left to the contractor's son; it being understood that the property
would not be at present in his own hands, but that he might inhabit the
house if he chose to do so.  It would thus be necessary for Lady
Scatcherd to find a home for herself, unless she could remain at Boxall
Hill by her son's permission. In this position of affairs the doctor
had been obliged to make a bargain between them.  Sir Louis did wish to
have the comfort, or perhaps the honour, of a country house; but he did
not wish to have the expense of keeping it up.  He was also willing to
let his mother live at the house; but not without a consideration. 
After a prolonged degree of haggling, terms were agreed upon; and a few
weeks after her husband's death, Lady Scatcherd found herself alone at
Boxall Hill--alone as regards society in the ordinary sense, but not 
quite alone as concerned her ladyship, for the faithful Hannah was
still with her.

The doctor was of course often at Boxall Hill, and never left it
without an urgent request from Lady Scatcherd that he would bring his
niece over to see her.  Now Lady Scatcherd was no fit companion for
Mary Thorne, and though Mary had often asked to be taken to Boxall
Hill, certain considerations had hitherto induced the doctor to refuse
the request; but there was about Lady Scatcherd,--a kind of homely 
honesty of purpose, an absence of all conceit as to her own position,
and a strength of womanly confidence in the doctor as her friend, which
by degrees won upon his heart.  When, therefore, both he and Mary felt
that it would be better for her again to absent herself for a while
from Greshamsbury, it was, after much deliberation, agreed that she
should go on a visit to Boxall Hill.

To Boxall Hill, accordingly, she went, and was received almost as a
princess.  Mary had all her life been accustomed to women of rank, and
had never habituated herself to feel much trepidation in the presence
of titled grandees; but she had prepared herself to be more than
ordinarily submissive to Lady Scatcherd.  Her hostess was a widow, was
not a woman of high birth, was a woman of whom her uncle spoke well;
and, for all these reasons, Mary was determined to respect her, and pay
to her every consideration.  But when she settled down in the house she
found it almost impossible to do so.  Lady Scatcherd treated her as a
farmer's wife might have treated a convalescent young lady who had been
sent to her charge for a few weeks, in order that she might benefit by 
the country air. Her ladyship could hardly bring herself to sit still
and eat her dinner tranquilly in her guest's presence.  And then
nothing was good enough for Mary.  Lady Scatcherd besought her, almost
with tears, to say what she liked best to eat and drink; and was in
despair when Mary declared she didn't care, that she liked anything,
and that she was in nowise particular in such matters.

'A roast fowl, Miss Thorne?'

'Very nice, Lady Scatcherd.'

'And bread sauce?'

'Bread sauce--yes; oh, yes--I like bread sauce,'--and poor Mary tried
hard to show a little interest.

'And just a few sausages.  We make them all in the house, Miss Thorne;
we know what they are.  And mashed potatoes--do you like them best
mashed or baked?'

Mary finding herself obliged to vote, voted for mashed potatoes.

'Very well.  But, Miss Thorne, if you like boiled fowl better, with a
little bit of ham, you know, I do hope you'll say so.  And there's lamb
in the house, quite beautiful; now do'ee say something; do'ee, Miss
Thorne.'

So invoked, Mary felt herself obliged to say something, and declared
for the roast fowl and sausages; but she found it very difficult to pay
much outward respect to a person who would pay so much outward respect
to her.  A day or two after her arrival it was decided that she should
ride about the place on a donkey; she was accustomed to riding, the
doctor having generally taken care that one of his own horses should,
when required, consent to carry a lady; but there was no steed at
Boxall Hill that she could mount; and when Lady Scatcherd had offered
to get a pony for her, she had willingly compromised matters by
expressing the delight she would have in making a campaign on a
donkey.  Upon this, Lady Scatcherd had herself set off in quest of the
desired animal, much to Mary's horror; and did not return till the
necessary purchase had been effected.  Then she came back with the 
donkey close at her heels, almost holding its collar, and stood there
at the hall-door till Mary came to approve.

'I hope she'll do.  I don't think she'll kick,' said Lady Scatcherd,
patting the head of her purchase quite triumphantly.

'Oh, you are so kind, Lady Scatcherd.  I'm sure she'll do quite nicely;
she seems very quiet,' said Mary.

'Please, my lady, it's a he,' said the boy who held the halter.

'Oh!  a he, is it?' said her ladyship; 'but the he-donkeys are quite as
quiet as the shes ain't they?'

'Oh, yes, my lady; a deal quieter, all the world over, and twice as
useful.'

'I'm so glad of that, Miss Thorne,' said Lady Scatcherd, her eyes
bright with joy.

And so Mary was established with her donkey, who did all that could be
expected from an animal in his position.

'But, dear Lady Scatcherd,' said Mary, as they sat together at the open
drawing-room window the same evening, 'you must not go on calling me
Miss Thorne; my name is Mary, you know. Won't you call me Mary?' and
she came and knelt at Lady Scatcherd's feet, and took hold of her,
looking up into her face.

Lady Scatcherd's cheeks became rather red, as though she was somewhat
ashamed of her position.

'You are very kind to me,' continued Mary, 'and it seems so cold to
hear you call me Miss Thorne.'

'Well, Miss Thorne, I'm sure I'd call you anything to please you.  Only
I didn't know whether you'd like it from me.  Else I do think Mary is
the prettiest name in all the language.'

'I should like it very much.'

'My dear Roger always loved that name better than any other; ten times
better.  I used to wish sometimes that I'd been called Mary.'

'Did he!  Why?'

'He once had a sister called Mary; such a beautiful creature! I declare
that sometimes think you are like her.'

'Oh, dear!  then she must have been very beautiful indeed!' said Mary,
laughing.

'She was very beautiful.  I just remember her--oh, so beautiful! she was
quite a poor girl, you know; and so was I then.  Isn't it odd that I
should have to be called "my lady" now.  Do you know Miss Thorne--'

'Mary!  Mary!' said her guest.

'Ah, yes; but somehow, I hardly like to make so free; but, as I was
saying, I do so dislike being called "my lady": I always think the
people are laughing at me; and so they are.'

'Oh, nonsense.'

'Yes they are though: poor dear Roger, he used to call me "my lady"
just to make fun of me; I didn't mind it so much from him.  But, Miss
Thorne--'

'Mary, Mary, Mary.'

'Ah, well!  I shall do it in time.  But, Miss--Mary, ha!  ha! ha!  never
mind, let me alone.  But what I want to say is this: do you think I
could drop it?  Hannah says, that if I go the right way about it she is
sure I can.'

'Oh!  but, Lady Scatcherd, you shouldn't think of such a thing.'

'Shouldn't I now?'

'Oh, no; for your husband's sake you should be proud of it.  He gained
great honour, you know.'

'Ah, well,' said she, sighing after a short pause; 'if you think it
will do him any good, of course I'll put up with it. And then I know
Louis would be mad if I talked of such a thing. But, Miss Thorne, dear,
a woman like me don't like to have to be made a fool of all the days of
her life if she can help it.'

'But, Lady Scatcherd,' said Mary, when this question of the title had
been duly settled, and her ladyship made to understand that she must
bear the burden for the rest of her life, 'but, Lady Scatcherd, you
were speaking of Sir Roger's sister; what became of her?'

'Oh, she did very well at last, as Sir Roger did himself; but in early
life she was very unfortunate--just at Historia Augusta time of my
marriage to dear Roger--,' and then, just as she was about to commence
so much as she knew of the history of Mary Scatcherd, she remembered
that the author of her sister-in-law's misery had been a Thorne, a
brother of the doctor; and, therefore, as she presumed, a relative of 
her guest; and suddenly she became mute.

'Well,' said Mary; 'just as you were married, Lady Scatcherd?'

Poor Lady Scatcherd had very little worldly knowledge, and did not in
the least know how to turn the conversation or escape from the trouble
into which she had fallen.  All manner of reflections began to crowd
upon her.  In her early days she had known very little of the Thornes,
nor had she thought much of them since, except as regarded her friend
the doctor; but at this moment she began to think that she had never
heard more than two brothers in the family.  Who then could have Mary's
father?  She felt at once that it would be improper for to say anything
as to Henry Thorne's terrible faults and sudden fate;--improper also, to
say more about Mary Scatcherd; but she was quite unable to drop the
matter otherwise than abruptly, and with a start.

'She was very unfortunate, you say, Lady Scatcherd?'

'Yes, Miss Thorne; Mary, I mean--never mind me--I shall do it in time. 
Yes, she was; but now I think of it, I had better say nothing more
about it.  There are reasons, and I ought not to have spoken of it. You
won't be provoked with me, will you?'

Mary assured her that she would not be provoked, and of course asked no
more questions about Mary Scatcherd; nor did she think much more about
it.  It was not so however with her ladyship, who could not keep
herself from reflecting that the old clergyman at the Close at
Barchester certainly had but two sons, one of whom was now the doctor
at Greshamsbury, and the other of whom had perished so wretchedly at
the gate of that farmyard.  Who then was the father of Mary Thorne?

The days passed very quietly at Boxall Hill.  Every morning Mary went
out on her donkey, who justified by his demeanour all that had been
said in his praise; then she would read or draw, then walk with Lady
Scatcherd, then dine, then walk again; and so the days passed quietly
away.  Once or twice a week the doctor would come over and drink his
tea there, riding home in the cool of the evening.  Mary also received 
one visit from her friend Patience.

So the days passed quietly away till the tranquillity of the house was
suddenly broken by tidings from London.  Lady Scatcherd received a
letter from her son, contained in three lines, in which he intimated
that on the following day he meant to honour them with a visit.  He had
intended, he said, to have gone to Brighton with some friends; but as
he felt himself a little out of sorts, he would postpone his marine 
trip and do his mother the grace of spending a few days with her.

This news was not very pleasant to Mary, by whom it had been 
understood, as it had been also by her uncle, that Lady Scatcherd would
have had the house to herself; but as there was no means of preventing
the evil, Mary could only inform the doctor, and prepare herself to
meet Sir Louis Scatcherd.



CHAPTER XXVIII

THE DOCTOR HEARS SOMETHING TO HIS ADVANTAGE

Sir Louis Scatcherd had told his mother that he was rather out of
sorts, and when he reached Boxall Hill it certainly did not appear that
he had given any exaggerated statement of his own maladies.  He
certainly was a good deal out of sorts. He had had more than one attack
of delirium tremens after his father's death, and had almost been at
death's door.

Nothing had been said about this by Dr Thorne at Boxall Hill; but he
was by no means ignorant of his ward's state.  Twice he had gone up to
London to visit him; twice he had begged him to go down into the
country and place himself under his mother's care.  On the last
occasion, the doctor had threatened him with all manner of pains and
penalties: with pains, as to his speedy departure from this world and
all its joys; and with penalties, in the shape of poverty if that 
departure should by any chance be retarded.  But these threats had at
the moment been in vain, and the doctor had compromised matters by
inducing Sir Louis to promise that he would go to Brighton.  The
baronet, however, who was at length frightened by some renewed attack,
gave up his Brighton scheme, and, without notice to the doctor, hurried
down to Boxall Hill.

Mary did not see him on the first day of his coming, but the doctor
did.  He received such intimation of the visit as enabled him to be at
the house soon after the young man's arrival; and, knowing that his
assistance might be necessary, he rode over to Boxall Hill.  It was a
dreadful task to him, this of making the same fruitless endeavour for
the son that he had made for the father, and in the same house.  But he
was bound by every consideration to perform the task.  He had promised
the father that he would do for the son all that was in his power; and
he had, moreover, the consciousness, that should Sir Louis succeed in
destroying himself, the next heir to all the property was his own
niece, Mary Thorne.

He found Sir Louis in a low, wretched, miserable state.  Though he was
a drunkard as his father was, he was not at all such a drunkard as his
father.  The physical capacities of the men were very different.  The
daily amount of alcohol which the father had consumed would have burnt
up the son in a week; whereas, though the son was continually tipsy,
what he swallowed would hardly have had an injurious effect upon the
father.

'You are all wrong, quite wrong,' said Sir Louis petulantly; 'it isn't
that at all.  I have taken nothing this week past--literally nothing. I
think it's the liver.'

Dr Thorne wanted no one to tell him what was the matter with his ward. 
It was his liver; his liver, and his head, and his stomach, and his
heart.  Every organ in his body had been destroyed, or was in the
course of destruction.  His father had killed himself with brandy; the
son more elevated in his tastes, was doing the same thing with curacoa,
maraschino, and cherry-bounce.

'Sir Louis,' said the doctor--he was obliged to be much more punctilious
with him than he had been with the contractor--'the matter is in your
hands entirely: if you cannot keep your lips from that accursed poison,
you have nothing in this world to look forward to; nothing, nothing!'

Mary proposed to return with her uncle to Greshamsbury, and he was at
first inclined that she should do so.  But this idea was overruled,
partly in compliance with Lady Scatcherd's entreaties, and partly
because it would have seemed as though they had both thought the
presence of the owner had made the house an unfit habitation for decent
people.  The doctor, therefore, returned, leaving Mary there; and Lady
Scatcherd busied herself between her two guests.

On the next day Sir Louis was able to come down to a late dinner, and
Mary was introduced to him. He had dressed himself in his best array;
and as he had--at any rate for the present moment--been frightened out
of his libations, he was prepared to make himself as agreeable as
possible. His mother waited on him almost as a slave might have done;
but she seemed to do so with the fear of a slave rather than the love of
a mother. She was fidgety in her attentions, and worried him by
endeavouring to make her evening sitting-room agreeable.

But Sir Louis, though he was not very sweetly behaved under these
manipulations from his mother's hands, was quite complaisant to Miss
Thorne; nay, after the expiration of a week he was almost more than
complaisant.  He piqued himself on his gallantry, and now found that,
in the otherwise dull seclusion of Boxall Hill, he had a good
opportunity of exercising it.  To do him justice it must be admitted
that he would not have been incapable of a decent career had he 
stumbled on some girl who could have loved him before he stumbled upon
his maraschino bottle.  Such might have been the case with many a lost
rake. The things that are bad are accepted because the things that are
good do not come easily in his way.  How many a miserable father
reviles with bitterness of spirit the low tastes of his son, who has
done nothing to provide his child with higher pleasures!

Sir Louis--partly in the hopes of Mary's smiles, and partly frightened
by the doctor's threats--did, for a while, keep himself within decent
bounds.  He did not usually appear before Mary's eyes till three or
four in the afternoon; but when he did come forth, he came forth sober
and resolute to please.  His mother was delighted, and was not slow to
sing his praises; and even the doctor, who now visited Boxall Hill more
frequently than ever, began to have some hopes.

One constant subject, I must not say of conversation, on the part of
Lady Scatcherd, but rather of declamation, had hitherto been the beauty
and manly attributes of Frank Gresham.  She had hardly ceased to talk
to Mary of the infinite good qualities of the young squire, and
especially of his prowess in the matter of Mr Moffat.  Mary had
listened to all this eloquence, not perhaps with inattention, but 
without much reply.  She had not been exactly sorry to hear Frank
talked about; indeed, had she been so minded, she could herself have
said something on the same subject; but she did not wish to take Lady
Scatcherd altogether into her confidence, and she had been unable to
say much about Frank Gresham without doing so.  Lady Scatcherd had,
therefore, gradually conceived that her darling was not a favourite
with her guest.

Now, therefore, she changed the subject; and, as her own son was
behaving with such unexampled propriety, she dropped Frank and confined
her eulogies to Louis.  He had been a little wild, she admitted; young
men so often were so; but she hoped that it was now over.

'He does still take a little drop of those French drinks in the
morning,' said Lady Scatcherd, in her confidence; for she was too
honest to be false, even in her own cause.  'He does that, I know: but
that's nothing, my dear, to swilling all day; and everything can't be
done at once, can it, Miss Thorne?'

On this subject Mary found her tongue loosened.  She could not talk
about Frank Gresham, but she could speak with hope to the mother of her
only son.  She could say that Sir Louis was still very young; that
there was reason to trust that he might now reform; that his present
conduct was apparently good; and that he appeared capable of better
things.  So much she did say; and the mother took her sympathy for more
than it was worth.

On this matter, and on this matter perhaps alone, Sir Louis and Lady
Scatcherd were in accord.  There was much to recommend Mary to the
baronet; not only did he see her to be beautiful, and perceive her to
be attractive and ladylike; but she was also the niece of the man who,
for the present, held the purse-strings of his wealth.  Mary, it is
true, had no fortune.  But Sir Louis knew that she was acknowledged to 
be a lady; and he was ambitious that his 'lady' should be a lady. There
was also much to recommend Mary to the mother, to any mother; and thus
it came to pass, that Miss Thorne had no obstacle between her and the
dignity of being Lady Scatcherd the second;--no obstacle whatever, if
only she could bring herself to wish it. 

It was some time--two or three weeks, perhaps--before Mary's mind was
first opened to this new brilliancy in her prospects.  Sir Louis at
first was rather afraid of her, and did not declare his admiration in
any very determined terms. He certainly paid her many compliments
which, from any one else she would have regarded as abominable.  But
she did not expect great things from the baronet's taste: she concluded
that he was only doing what he thought a gentleman should do; and she
was willing to forgive much for Lady Scatcherd's sake.

His first attempts were, perhaps, more ludicrous than passionate.  He
was still too much an invalid to take walks, and Mary was therefore
saved from his company in her rambles; but he had a horse of his own at
Boxall Hill, and had been advised to ride by the doctor.  Mary also
rode--on a donkey only, it is true--but Sir Louis found himself bound in 
gallantry to accompany her.  Mary's steed had answered every 
expectations, and proved himself very quiet; so quiet, that without the
admonition of a c