udgel behind him, he could hardly be persuaded into
the demurest trot.  Now, as Sir Louis's horse was of a very different
mettle, he found it rather difficult not to step faster than his
inamorata; and, let it him struggle as he would, was generally so far
ahead as to be debarred the delights of conversation.

When the second time he proposed to accompany her, Mary did what she
could to hinder it.  She saw that he had been rather ashamed of the
manner in which his companion was mounted, and she herself would have
enjoyed the ride much more without him. He was an invalid, however; it
was necessary to make much of him, and Mary did not absolutely refuse
the offer.

'Lady Scatcherd,' said he, as they were standing at the door previous
to mounting--he always called his mother Lady Scatcherd--'why don't you
take a horse for Miss Thorne?  This donkey is--is--really is, so
very--very--can't go at all, you know?'

Lady Scatcherd began to declare that she would willing have got a pony
if Mary would have let her do it.

'Oh, no, Lady Scatcherd; not on any account.  I do like the donkey so
much--I do indeed.'

'But he won't go,' said Sir Louis.  'And for a person who rides like
you, Miss Thorne--such a horsewoman you know--why, you know, Lady
Scatcherd, it's positively ridiculous; d---- absurd, you know.'

And then, with an angry look at his mother, he mounted his horse, and
was soon leading the way down the avenue.

'Miss Thorne,' said he, pulling himself up at the gate, 'if I had known
that I was to be so extremely happy as to have found you here, I would
have brought you down the most beautiful creature, and Arab.  She
belongs to my friend Jenkins; but I wouldn't have stood at any price in
getting her for you.  By Jove!  if you were on that mare, I'd back you,
for style and appearance, against anything in Hyde Park.'

The offer of this sporting wager, which naturally would have been very
gratifying to Mary, was lost upon her, for Sir Louis had again
unwittingly got on in advance, but he stopped himself in time to hear
Mary again declare her passion was a donkey.

'If you could only see Jenkins's little mare, Miss Thorne!  Only say
one word, and she shall be down here before the week's end.  Price
shall be no obstacle--none whatever.  By Jove, what a pair you would
be!'

This generous offer was repeated four or five times; but on each
occasion Mary only half heard what was said, and on each occasion the
baronet was far too much in advance to hear Mary's reply.  At last he
recollected that he wanted to call on one of his tenants, and begged
his companion to allow him to ride on.

'If you at all dislike being alone, you know--'

'Oh dear no, not at all, Sir Louis.  I am quite used to it.'

'Because I don't care about it, you know; only I can't make this horse
of walk the same pace as that brute.'

'You mustn't abuse my pet, Sir Louis.'

'It's a d--- shame on my mother's part;' said Sir Louis, who, even when
in his best behaviour, could not quite give up his ordinary mode of
conversation.  'When she was fortunate enough to get such a girl as you
to come and stay with her, she ought to have had something proper for
her to ride upon; but I'll look to it as soon as I am a little
stronger, you see if I don't;' and, so saying, Sir Louis trotted off, 
leaving Mary in peace with her donkey.

Sir Louis had now been living cleanly and forswearing sack for what was
to him a very long period, and his health felt the good effects of it. 
No one rejoiced at this more cordially than did the doctor.  To rejoice
at it was with him a point of conscience.  He could not help telling
himself now and again that, circumstanced as he was, he was most 
specially bound to take joy in any sign of reformation that the baronet
might show.  Not to do so would be almost tantamount to wishing that he
might die in order that Mary might inherit his wealth; and, therefore,
the doctor did with all his energy devote himself to the difficult task
of hoping and striving that Sir Louis might yet live to enjoy what was 
his own.  But the task was altogether a difficult one, for as Sir Louis
became stronger in health, so also did he become more exorbitant in his
demands on the doctor's patience, and more repugnant to the doctor's
tastes.

In his worst fits of disreputable living he was ashamed to apply to his
guardian for money; and in his worst fits of illness he was through
fear, somewhat patient under his doctor's hands; but just at present he
had nothing of which to be ashamed, and was not at all patient.

'Doctor,'--said he, one day, at Boxall Hill--'how about those 
Greshamsbury title-deeds?'

'Oh, that will all be properly settled between my lawyer and your own.'

'Oh--ah--yes; no doubt the lawyers will settle it; settle it with a fine
bill of costs.  But, as Finnie says,'--Finnie was Sir Louis's legal
adviser--'I have got a tremendously large interest at stake in this
matter; eighty thousand pounds is no joke.  It ain't everybody that can
shell out eighty thousand pounds when they're wanted; and I should like
to know how the thing's going on.  I've a right to ask, you know; eh,
doctor?'

'The title-deeds of a large portion of Greshamsbury estate will be
placed with the mortgage-deeds before the end of next month.'

'Oh, that's all right.  I choose to know about these things; for though
my father did make such a con-foun-ded will, that's no reason I
shouldn't know how things are going.'

'You shall know everything that I know, Sir Louis.'

'And now, doctor, what are we to do about money?'

'About money?'

'Yes; money, rhino, ready!  "put money in your purse and cut a dash";
eh, doctor?   Not that I want to cut a dash.  No, I'm going on the
quiet line altogether now: I've done with that sort of thing.'

'I'm heartily glad of it; heartily,' said the doctor.

'Yes, I'm not going to make way for my far-away cousin yet; not if I
know it, at least.  I shall soon be all right now, doctor; shan't I?'

'"All right" is a long word, Sir Louis.  But I do hope you will be all
right in time, if you will live with decent prudence.  You shouldn't
take that filth in the morning though.'

'Filth in the morning!   That's my mother, I suppose!  That's her
ladyship!  She's been talking, has she?  Don't you believe her,
doctor.  There's not a young man in Barsetshire is going more regular,
all right within the posts, than I am.'

The doctor was obliged to acknowledge that there did seem to be some
improvement.

'And now, doctor, how about money, eh?'

Doctor Thorne, like other guardians similarly circumstanced, began to
explain that Sir Louis had already had a good deal of money, and had
begun also to promise that more should be forthcoming in the event of
good behaviour, when he was somewhat suddenly interrupted by Sir Louis.

'Well, now; I'll tell you what, doctor; I've got a bit of news for you;
something that I think will astonish you.'

The doctor opened his eyes, and tried to look as though ready to be
surprised.

'Something that will really make you look about; and something, too,
that will be very much to the hearer's advantage,--as the newspaper
advertisements say.'

'Something to my advantage?' said the doctor.

'Well, I hope you'll think so.  Doctor, what would you think now of my
getting married?'

'I should be delighted to hear of it--more delighted than I can express;
that is, of course, if you were to marry well.  It was your father's
most eager wish that you should marry early.'

'That's partly my reason,' said the young hypocrite.  'But then if I
marry I must have an income fit to live on; eh, doctor?'

The doctor had some fear that his interesting protege was desirous of a
wife for the sake of the income, instead of desiring the income for the
sake of the wife.  But let the cause be what it would, marriage would
probably be good for him; and he had no hesitation, therefore, in
telling him, that if he married well, he should be put in possession of
sufficient income to maintain the new Lady Scatcherd in a manner
becoming her dignity.

'As to marrying well,' said Sir Louis, 'you, I take it, will the be the
last man, doctor, to quarrel with my choice.'

'Will I?' said the doctor, smiling.

'Well, you won't disapprove, I guess, as the Yankee says.  What would
you think of Miss Mary Thorne?'

It must be said in Sir Louis's favour that he had probably no idea
whatever of the estimation in which such young ladies as Mary Thorne
are held by those who are nearest and dearest to them.  He had no sort
of conception that she was regarded by her uncle and inestimable
treasure, almost too precious to be rendered up to the arms of any man;
and infinitely beyond any price in silver and gold, baronet's incomes
of eight or ten thousand a year, and such coins usually current in the 
world's markets.  He was a rich man and a baronet, and Mary was an
unmarried girl without a portion.  In Louis's estimation he was
offering everything, and asking for nothing.  He certainly had some
idea that girls were apt to be coy, and required a little wooing in the
shape of presents, civil speeches--perhaps kisses also.  The civil 
speeches he had, he thought, done, and imagined that they had been well
received.  The other things were to follow; an Arab pony, for
instance--and the kisses probably with it; and then all these
difficulties would be smoothed.

But he did not for a moment conceive that there would be any difficulty
with the uncle.  How should there be?  Was he not a baronet with ten
thousand a year coming to him?  Had he not everything which fathers
want for portionless daughters, and uncles for dependant nieces?  Might
he not well inform the doctor that he had something to tell him for his
advantage?

And yet, to tell the truth, the doctor did not seem to be overjoyed
when the announcement was first made to him.  He was by no means
overjoyed.  On the contrary, even Sir Louis could perceive his
guardian's surprise was altogether unmixed with delight.

What a question was this that was asked him!  What would he think of a
marriage between Mary Thorne--his Mary and Sir Louis Scatcherd?  Between
the alpha of the whole alphabet, and him whom he could not but regard
as the omega!  Think of it!  Why he would think of it as though a lamb
and a wolf were to stand at the altar together.  Had Sir Louis been a 
Hottentot, or an Esquimaux, the proposal could not have astonished him
more.  The two persons were so totally of a different class, that the
idea of the one falling in love with the other had never occurred to
him.  'What would you think of Miss Mary Thorne?'  Sir Louis had asked;
and the doctor, instead of answering him with ready and pleasant 
alacrity, stood silent, thunderstruck with amazement.

'Well, wouldn't she be a good wife?' said Sir Louis, rather in a tone
of disgust at the evident disapproval shown in his choice.  'I thought
you would have been so delighted.'

'Mary Thorne!' ejaculated the doctor at last.  'Have you spoken to my
niece about this, Sir Louis?'

'Well, I have and yet I haven't; I haven't, and yet in a manner I
have.'

'I don't understand you,' said the doctor.

'Why, you see, I haven't exactly popped to her yet; but I have been
doing the civil; and if she's up to snuff, as I take her to be, she
knows very well what I'm after by this time.'

Up to snuff!  Mary Thorne, his Mary Thorne, up to snuff!  To snuff too
of such a very disagreeable description!

'I think, Sir Louis, that you are in mistake about this.  I think you
will find that Mary will not be disposed to avail herself of the great
advantages--for great they undoubtedly are--which you are able to offer
to your intended wife.  If you will take my advice, you will give up
thinking of Mary.  She would not suit you.'

'Not suit me!  Oh, but I think she just would.  She's got no money, you
mean?'

'No, I did not mean that.  It will not signify to you whether your wife
has money or not.  You need not look for money.  But you should think
of some one more nearly of your temperament. I am quite sure that my
niece would refuse you.'

These last words the doctor uttered with much emphasis.  His intention
was to make the baronet understand that the matter was quite hopeless,
and to induce him if possible to drop it on the spot.  But he did not
know Sir Louis; he ranked him too low in the scale of human beings, and
gave him no credit for any strength of character.  Sir Louis in his way
did love Mary Thorne.  And could not bring himself to believe that Mary
did not, or at any rate, would not soon return his passion.  He was,
moreover, sufficiently obstinate, firm we ought perhaps to say--for his
pursuit in this case was certainly not an evil one,--and he at once made
up his mind to succeed in spite of the uncle.

'If she consents, however, you will do so too?' asked he.

'It is impossible that she should consent,' said the doctor.

'Impossible!  I don't see anything at all impossible.  But if she
does?'

'But she won't.'

'Very well,--that's to be seen.  But just tell me this, if she does,
will you consent?'

'The stars would fall first.  It's all nonsense.  Give it up, my dear
friend; believe me you are only preparing unhappiness for yourself;'
and the doctor put his hand kindly on the young man's arm.  'She will
not, cannot, accept such an offer.'

'Will not!  cannot!' said the baronet, thinking over all the reasons
which in his estimation could possibly be inducing the doctor to be so
hostile to his views, and shaking the hand of his arm.  'Will not! 
cannot!  But come, doctor, answer my question fairly.  If she'll have
me for better or worse, you won't say aught against it; will you?'

'But she won't have you; why should you give her and yourself the pain
of a refusal?'

'Oh, as for that, I must stand my chance like another.  And as for her,
why d---, doctor, you wouldn't have me believe that any young lady
thinks it so very dreadful to have a baronet with ten thousand pounds a
year at her feet, specially when that same baronet ain't very old, nor
yet particularly ugly. I ain't so green as that, doctor.'

'I suppose she must go through with it, then,' said the doctor, musing.

'But, Dr Thorne, I did look for a kinder answer from you, considering
all that you so often say about your great friendship with my father. I
did think you'd at any rate answer me when I asked you a question.'

But the doctor did not want to answer that special question. Could it
be possible that Mary should wish to marry this odious man, could such
a state of things be imagined to be the case, he would not refuse his
consent, infinitely as he would be disgusted by her choice.  But he
would not give Sir Louis any excuse of telling Mary that her uncle
approved of so odious a match.

'I cannot say that in case I would approve of such a marriage, Sir
Louis.  I cannot bring myself to say so; for I know it would make you
both miserable.  But on that matter my niece will choose wholly for
herself.'

'And about money, doctor?'

'If you marry a decent woman you shall not want the means of supporting
her decently,' and so saying the doctor walked away, leaving Sir Louis
to his meditations.



CHAPTER XXIX

THE DONKEY RIDE

Sir Louis, when left to himself, was slightly dismayed and somewhat
discouraged; but he was not induced to give up his object.  The first
effort of his mind was made in conjecturing what private motive Dr
Thorne could possibly have in wishing to debar his niece from marrying
a rich young baronet.  That the objection was personal to himself, Sir 
Louis did not for a moment imagine.  Could it be that the doctor did
not wish that his niece should be richer, and grander, and altogether
bigger than himself?  Or was it possible that his guardian was anxious
to prevent him from marrying from some view of the reversion of the
large fortune?  That there was some such reason, Sir Louis was well 
sure; but let it be what it might, he would get the better of the
doctor.  'He knew so,' so he said to himself, 'what stuff girls were
made of.  Baronets did not grow like blackberries.'  And so, assuring
himself with such philosophy, he determined to make his offer.

The time he selected for doing this was the hour before dinner; but on
the day on which his conversation with the doctor had taken place, he
was deterred by the presence of a strange visitor.  To account for this
strange visit it will be necessary that we should return to
Greshamsbury for a few minutes. 

Frank, when he returned home for his summer vacation, found that Mary
had again flown; and the very fact of her absence added fuel to the
fire of his love, more perhaps then even her presence might have done. 
For the flight of the quarry ever adds eagerness to the pursuit of the
huntsman.  Lady Arabella, moreover, had a bitter enemy; a foe, utterly 
opposed to her side in the contest, where she had once fondly looked
for her staunchest ally.  Frank was now in the habit of corresponding
with Miss Dunstable, and received from her most energetic admonitions
to be true to the love which he had sworn.  True to it he resolved to
be; and, therefore, when he found that Mary was flown, he resolved to
fly after her. 

He did not, however, do this till he had been in a measure provoked by
it by the sharp-tongued cautions and blunted irony of his mother.  It
was not enough for her that she had banished Mary out of the parish,
and made Dr Thorne's life miserable; not enough that she harassed her
husband with harangues on the constant subject of Frank's marrying
money, and dismayed Beatrice with invectives against the iniquity of 
her friend.  The snake was so but scotched; to kill it outright she
must induce Frank utterly to renounce Miss Thorne.

This task she essayed, but not exactly with success.  'Well, mother,'
said Frank, at last turning very red, partly with shame, and partly
with indignation, as he made the frank avowal, 'since you press me
about it, I tell you fairly that my mind is made up to marry Mary
sooner or later, if--'

'Oh, Frank!  good heavens!  you wicked boy; you are saying this
purposely to drive me distracted.'

'If,' continued Frank, not attending to his mother's interjections, 'if
she will consent.'

'Consent!' said Lady Arabella.  'Oh, heavens!' and falling into the
corner of her sofa, she buried her face in her handkerchief.

'Yes, mother, if she will consent.  And now that I have told you so
much, it is only just that I should tell you this also; that as far as
I can see at present I have no reason to hope that she will do so.'

'Oh, Frank, the girl is doing all she can to catch you,' said Lady
Arabella,--not prudently.

'No, mother; there you wrong her altogether; wrong her most cruelly.'

'You ungracious, wicked boy!  you call me cruel!'

'I don't call you cruel; but you wrong her cruelly, most cruelly.  When
I have spoken to her about this--for I have spoken to her--she has
behaved exactly as you would have wanted her to do; but not at all as I
wished her.  She has given me no encouragement.  You have turned her
out among you'--Frank was beginning to be very bitter now--'but she has 
done nothing to deserve it.  If there has been any fault it has been
mine.  But it is well now that we should understand each other.  My
intention is to marry Mary if I can.'  And, so speaking, certainly
without due filial respect, he turned towards the door.

'Frank,' said his mother, raising herself up with energy to make one
last appeal.  'Frank, do you wish to see me die of a broken heart?'

'You know, mother, I would wish to make you happy, if I could.'

'If you wish to see me ever happy again, if you do not wish to see me
sink broken-hearted to my grave, you must give up this mad idea,
Frank,'--and now all Lady Arabella's energy came out. 'Frank there is
but one course left open to you.  You MUST marry money.'  And then Lady
Arabella stood up before her son as Lady Macbeth might have stood, had
Lady Macbeth lived to have a son of Frank's years.

'Miss Dunstable, I suppose,' said Frank, scornfully.  'No, mother; I
made an ass and worse than an ass of myself once in that way, and I
won't do it again.  I hate money.'

'Oh, Frank!'

'I hate money.'

'But, Frank, the estate?'

'I hate the estate--at least I shall hate it if I am expected to buy it
at such a price as that.  The estate is my father's.'

'Oh, no, Frank; it is not.'

'It is in the sense I mean.  He may do with it as he pleases; he will
never have a word of complaint from me.  I am ready to go into a
profession to-morrow.  I'll be a lawyer, or a doctor, or an engineer; I
don't care what.' Frank, in his enthusiasm, probably overlooked some of
the preliminary difficulties.  'Or I'll take a farm under him, and earn
my bread that way; but, mother, don't talk to me any more about 
marrying money.'  And, so saying, Frank left the room.

Frank, it will be remembered, was twenty-one when he was first
introduced to the reader; he is now twenty-two.  It may be said that
there was a great difference between his character then and now.  A
year at that period will make a great difference; but the change has
been, not in his character, but in his feelings.

Frank went out from his mother and immediately ordered his black horse
to be got ready for him.  He would at once go over to Boxall Hill.  He
went himself to the stables to give his orders; and as he returned to
get his gloves and whip he met Beatrice in the corridor.

'Beatrice,' said he, 'step in here,' and she followed him into his
room.  'I'm not going to bear this any longer; I'm going to Boxall
Hill.'

'Oh, Frank!  how can you be so imprudent?'

'You, at any rate, have some decent feeling for Mary.  I believe you
have some regard for her; and therefore I tell you. Will you send her
any message?'

'Oh, yes; my best, best love; that is if you will see her; but, Frank,
you are very foolish, very; and she will be infinitely distressed.'

'Do not mention this, not at present; not that I mean you to make any
secret of it.  I shall tell my father everything.  I'm off now!' and
then, paying no attention to her remonstrance, he turned down the
stairs and was soon on horseback.

He took the road to Boxall Hill, but he did not ride very fast: he did
not go jauntily as a jolly, thriving wooer; but musingly, and often
with diffidence, meditating every now and then whether it would not be
better for him to turn back: to turn back--but not from fear of his
mother; not from prudential motives; not because that often-repeated
lesson as to marrying money was beginning to take effect; not from such
causes as these; but because he doubted how he might be received by
Mary.

He did, it is true, think something about his worldly prospects.  He
had talked rather grandiloquently to his mother as to his hating money,
and hating the estate.  His mother's never-ceasing worldly cares on
such subjects perhaps demanded that a little grandiloquence should be
opposed to them.  But Frank did not hate the estate; nor did he at all 
hate the position of an English country gentleman.  Miss Dunstable's
eloquence, however, rang in his ears.  For Miss Dunstable had an
eloquence of her own, even in her letters.  'Never let them talk you
out of your own true, honest, hearty feelings,' she had said. 
'Greshamsbury is a very nice place, I am sure; and I hope I shall see
it some day; but all its green knolls are not half so nice, should not
be half so precious, as the pulses of your own heart.  That is your own
estate, your own, your very own--your own and another's; whatever may go
to the money-lenders, don't send that there. Don't mortgage that, Mr
Gresham.'

'No,' said Frank, pluckily, as he put his horse into a faster trot, 'I
won't mortgage that.  They may do what they like with the estate; but
my heart's my own,' and so speaking to himself, almost aloud, he turned
a corner of the road rapidly and came at once upon the doctor.

'Hallo, doctor!  is that you?' said Frank, rather disgusted.

'What!  Frank!   I hardly expected to meet you here,' said Dr Thorne,
not much better pleased.

They were now not above a mile from Boxall Hill, and the doctor,
therefore, could not but surmise whither Frank was going.  They had
repeatedly met since Frank's return from Cambridge, both in the village
and in the doctor's house; but not a word had been said between them
about Mary beyond what the merest courtesy had required.  Not that each
did not love the other sufficiently to make a full confidence between
them desirable to both; but neither had had the courage to speak out.

Nor had either of them the courage to do so now.  'Yes,' said Frank,
blushing, 'I am going to Lady Scatcherd's.  Shall I find the ladies at
home?'

'Yes; Lady Scatcherd is there; but Sir Louis is there also--an invalid:
perhaps you would not wish to meet him.'

'Oh!   I don't mind,' said Frank, trying to laugh; 'he won't bite, I
suppose?'

The doctor longed in his heart to pray to Frank to return with him; not
to go and make further mischief; not to do that which might cause a
more bitter estrangement between himself and the squire.  But he had
not the courage to do it.  He could not bring himself to accuse Frank
of being in love with his niece. So after a few more senseless words on
either side, words which each knew to be senseless as he uttered them,
they both rode on their own ways.

And then the doctor silently, and almost unconsciously, made such a
comparison between Louis Scatcherd and Frank Gresham as Hamlet made
between the dead and live king.  It was Hyperion to a satyr.  Was it
not as impossible that Mary should not love the one, as that she should
love the other?  Frank's offer of his affections had at first probably
been but a boyish ebullition of feeling; but if it should now be, that
this had grown into a manly and disinterested love, how could Mary
remain unmoved?  What could her heart want more, better, more
beautiful, more rich than such a love as this?  Was he not personally
all that a girl could like?  Were not his disposition, mind, character,
acquirements, all such as women most delight to love?  Was it not
impossible that Mary should be indifferent to him?

So meditated the doctor as he road along, with only too true a
knowledge of human nature.  Ah!  it was impossible, quite impossible
that Mary should be indifferent.  She had never been indifferent since
Frank had uttered his first half-joking word of love.  Such things are
more important to women than they are to men, to girls than they are to
boys.  When Frank had first told her that he loved her; aye, months 
before that, when he merely looked his love, her heart had received the
whisper, had acknowledged the glance, unconscious as she was herself,
and resolved as she was to rebuke his advances.  When, in her hearing,
he had said soft nothings to Patience Oriel, a hated, irrepressible
tear had gathered in her eye.  When he had pressed in his warm, loving 
grasp the hand which she had offered in him in token of mere 
friendship, her heart had forgiven him the treachery, nay, almost
thanked him for it, before her eyes or her words had been ready to
rebuke him.  When the rumour of his liaison with Miss Dunstable reached
her ears, when she heard of Miss Dunstable's fortune, she had wept,
wept outright, in her chamber--wept, as she said to herself, to think
that he could be so mercenary; but she had wept, as she should have
said to herself, at finding that he was so faithless.  Then, when she 
knew at last that this rumour was false, when she found that she was
banished from Greshamsbury for his sake, when she was forced to retreat
with her friend Patience, how could she but love him, in that he was
not mercenary?  How could she not love him in that was so faithful?

It was impossible that she should not love him.  Was he not the
brightest and the best of men that she had ever seen, or was like to
see?--that she could possibly ever see, she would have said to herself,
could she have brought herself to own the truth?  And then, when she
heard how true he was, how he persisted against father, mother, and
sisters, how could it be that that should not be a merit in her eyes
which was so great a fault in theirs?  When Beatrice, with would-be
solemn face, but with eyes beaming with feminine affection, would 
gravely talk of Frank's tender love as a terrible misfortune, as a
misfortune to them all, to Mary herself as well as others, how could
Mary do other than love him?  'Beatrice is his sister,' she would say
within her own mind, 'otherwise she would never talk like this; were
she not his sister, she could not but know the value of such love as
this.'  Ah!  yes; Mary did love him; love him with all the strength of
her heart; and the strength of her heart was very great.  And now by
degrees, in those lonely donkey-rides at Boxall Hill, in those solitary
walks, she was beginning to own to herself the truth.

And now that she did own it, what should be her course?  What should
she do, how should she act if this loved one persevered in his love? 
And, ah!  what should she do, how should she act if he did not
persevere?  Could it be that there should be happiness in store for
her?  Was it not too clear that, let the matter go how it would, there
was no happiness in store for her?  Much as she might love Frank 
Gresham, she could never consent to be his wife unless the squire would
smile on her as his daughter-in-law.  The squire had been all that was
kind, all that was affectionate.  And then, too, Lady Arabella!  As she
thought of the Lady Arabella a sterner form of thought came across her
brow.  Why should Lady Arabella rob her of her heart's joy?  What was 
Lady Arabella that she, Mary Thorne, need quail before her?  Had Lady
Arabella stood only in her way, Lady Arabella, flanked by the De Courcy
legion, Mary felt that she could have demanded Frank's hand as her own
before them all without a blush of shame or a moment's hesitation. 
Thus, when her heart was all but ready to collapse within her, would
she gain some little strength by thinking of the Lady Arabella.

'Please, my lady, here be young squire Gresham,' said one of the
untutored servants at Boxall Hill, opening Lady Scatcherd's little
parlour door as her ladyship was amusing herself by pulling down and
turning, and re-folding, and putting up again, a heap of household
linen which was kept in a huge press for the express purpose of
supplying her with occupation.

Lady Scatcherd, holding a vast counterpane in her arms, looked back
over her shoulders and perceived that Frank was in the room.  Down went
the counterpane on the ground, and Frank soon found himself in the very
position which that useful article had so lately filled.

'Oh!  Master Frank!  oh, Master Frank!' said her ladyship, almost in an
hysterical fit of joy; and then she hugged and kissed him as she had
never kissed and hugged her own son since that son had first left the
parent nest.

Frank bore it patiently and with a merry laugh.  'But, Lady Scatcherd,'
said he, 'what will they all say?  you forget I am a man now,' and he
stooped his head as she again pressed her lips upon his forehead.

'I don't care what none of 'em say,' said her ladyship, quite going
back to her old days; 'I will kiss my own boy; so I will. Eh, but
Master Frank, this is good on you.  A sight of you is good for sore
eyes; and my eyes have been sore enough since I saw you;' and she put
her apron up to wipe a tear away.

'Yes,' said Frank, gently trying to disengage himself, but not
successfully: 'yes, you have had a great loss, Lady Scatcherd. I was so
sorry when I heard of your grief.'

'You always had a soft, kind heart, Master Frank; so you had. God's
blessing on you!  What a fine man you have grown!  Deary me!  Well, it
seems as though it were only just t'other day like.'  And she pushed
him a little from her, so that she might look the better into his face.

'Well.  Is it all right?  I suppose you would hardly know me again now
I've got a pair of whiskers?'

'Know you!  I should know you well if I saw but the heel of your foot. 
Why, what a head of hair you have got, and so dark too!  but it doesn't
curl as it used once.'  And she stroked his hair, and looked into his
eyes, and put her hand to his cheeks.  'You'll think me an old fool,
Master Frank: I know that; but you may think what you like.  If I live
for the next twenty years you'll always be my own boy; so you will.'

By degrees, slow degrees, Frank managed to change the conversation, and
to induce Lady Scatcherd to speak on some other topic than his own
infantine perfections.  He affected an indifference as he spoke of her
guest, which would have deceived no one but Lady Scatcherd; but her it
did deceive; and then he asked where Mary was.

'She's just gone out on her donkey--somewhere about the place. She rides
on a donkey mostly every day.  But you'll stop and take a bit of dinner
with us?  Eh, now do'ee, Master Frank.'

But Master Frank excused himself.  He did not choose to pledge himself
to sit down to dinner with Mary.  He did not know in what mood they
might return with regard to each other at dinner-time.  He said,
therefore, that he would return to the house again before he went.

Lady Scatcherd then began making apologies for Sir Louis.  She was an
invalid; the doctor had been with him all the morning, and he was not
yet out of his room.

These apologies Frank willingly accepted, and then made his way as his
could on to the lawn.  A gardener, of whom he inquired, offered to go
with him in pursuit of Miss Thorne.  This assistance, however, he
declined, and set forth in quest of her, having learnt what were her
most usual haunts.  Nor was he directed wrongly; for after walking
about twenty minutes, he saw through the trees the legs of a donkey
moving on the green-sward, at about two hundred yards from him.  On 
that donkey doubtless sat Mary Thorne.

The donkey was coming towards him; not exactly in a straight line, but
so much so as to make it impossible that Mary should not see him if he
stood still.  He did stand still, and soon emerging from the trees,
Mary saw him all but close to her.

Her heart gave a leap within her, but she was so far mistress of
herself as to repress any visible sign of outward emotion. She did not
fall from her donkey, or scream, or burst into tears.  She merely
uttered the words, 'Mr Gresham!' in a tone of not unnatural surprise.

'Yes,' said he, trying to laugh, but less successful than she had been
suppressing a show of feeling.  'Mr Gresham!  I have come over at last
to pay my respects to you.  You must have thought me very uncourteous
not to do so before.'

This she denied.  She had not, she said, thought him at all uncivil. 
She had come to Boxall Hill to be out of the way; and, of course, had
not expected any such formalities.  As she uttered this she almost
blushed at the abrupt truth of what she was saying.  But she was taken
so much unawares that she did not know how to make the truth other than
abrupt.

'To be out of the way!' said Frank.  'And why should you want to be out
of the way?'

'Oh!  there were reasons,'said she, laughing.  'Perhaps I have
quarrelled dreadfully with my uncle.'

Frank at the present moment had not about him a scrap of badinage.  He
had not a single easy word at his command.  He could not answer her
with anything in guise of a joke; so he walked on, not answering at
all.

'I hope all my friends at Greshamsbury are well,' said Mary. 'Is
Beatrice quite well?'

'Quite well,' said he.

'And Patience?'

'What, Miss Oriel; yes, I believe so.  I haven't seen her this day or
two.'  How was it that Mary felt a little flush of joy, as Frank spoke
in this indifferent way about Miss Oriel's health?

'I thought she was always a particular friend of yours,' said she.

'What!  who?  Miss Oriel?  So she is!  I like her amazingly; so does
Beatrice.'  And then he walked about six steps in silence, plucking up
courage for the great attempt.  He did pluck up his courage and then
rushed at once to the attack.

'Mary!' said he, and as he spoke he put his hand on the donkey's neck,
and looked tenderly into her face.  He looked tenderly, and, as Mary's
ear at once told her, his voice sounded more soft than it had ever
sounded before.  'Mary, do you remember the last time that we were
together?'

Mary did remember it well.  It was on that occasion when he had
treacherously held her hand; on that day when, according to law, he had
become a man; when he had outraged all the propriety of the De Courcy
interest by offering his love to Mary in Augusta's hearing.  Mary did
remember it well; but how was she to speak of it?  'It was your
birthday, I think,' said she.

'Yes, it was my birthday.  I wonder whether you remember what I said to
you then?'

'I remember that you were very foolish, Mr Gresham.'

'Mary, I have come to repeat my folly;--that is, if it be folly. I told
you then that I loved you, and I dare say that I did it awkwardly, like
a boy.  Perhaps I may be just as awkward now; but you ought at any rate
to believe me when you find that a year has not altered me.'

Mary did not think him at all awkward, and she did believe him. But how
was she to answer him?  She had not yet taught herself what answer she
ought to make if he persisted in his suit.  She had hitherto been
content to run away from him; but she had done so because she would not
submit to be accused of the indelicacy of putting herself in his way. 
She had rebuked him when he first spoke of his love; but she had done
so because she looked on what he said as a boy's nonsense.  She had
schooled herself in obedience to the Greshamsbury doctrines.  Was there
any real reason, any reason founded on truth and honesty, why she
should not be a fitting wife to Frank Gresham,--Francis Newbold Gresham,
of Greshamsbury, though he was, or was to be?'

He was well born--as well born as any gentleman in England.  She was
basely born--as basely born as any lady could be.  Was this sufficient
bar against such a match?  Mary felt in her heart that some twelvemonth
since, before she knew what little she did now know of her own story,
she would have said it was so. And would she indulge her own love by
inveigling him she loved into a base marriage?  But then reason spoke 
again.  What, after all, was this blood of which she had taught herself
to think so much?  Would she have been more honest, more fit to grace
an honest man's hearthstone, had she been the legitimate descendant of
a score of legitimate duchesses?  Was it not her first duty to think of
him--of what would make him happy?  Then of her uncle--what he would 
approve?  Then of herself--what would best become her modesty; her sense
of honour?  Could it be well that she should sacrifice the happiness of
two persons to a theoretic love of pure blood?

So she had argued within herself.  Not now, sitting on the donkey, with
Frank's hand before her on the tame brute's neck; but on other former
occasions as she had ridden along demurely among those trees.  So she
had argued; but she had never brought her arguments to a decision.  All
manner of thoughts crowded on her to prevent her doing so.  She would 
think of the squire, and resolve to reject Frank; and would then
remember Lady Arabella, and resolve to accept him.  Her resolutions,
however, were most irresolute; and so, when Frank appeared in person
before her, carrying his heart in his hand, she did not know what
answer to make to him.  Thus it was with her as with so many other
maidens similarly circumstanced; at last she left it all to chance.

'You ought at any rate, to believe me,' said Frank, 'when you find that
a year has not altered me.'

'A year should have taught you to be wiser,'said she.  'You should have
learnt by this time, Mr Gresham, that your lot and mine are not cast in
the same mould; that our stations in life are different.  Would your
father or mother approve of your even coming here to see me?'

Mary, as she spoke these sensible words, felt that they were 'flat,
stale, and unprofitable.'  She felt also, that they were not true in
sense; that they did not come from her heart; that they were not such
as Frank deserved at her hands, and she was ashamed of herself.

'My father I hope will approve of it,' said he.  'That my mother should
disapprove of it is a misfortune which I cannot help; but on this point
I will take no answer from my father or mother; the question is one too
personal to myself. Mary, if you say that you will not, or cannot return
my love, I will go away;--not from here only, but from Greshamsbury. My
presence shall not banish you from all that you hold dear. If you can
honestly say that I am nothing to you, can be nothing to you, I will
then tell my mother that she may be at ease, and I will go away
somewhere and get over it as I may.' The poor fellow got so far, looking
apparently at the donkey's ears, with hardly a gasp of hope in his
voice, and he so far carried Mary with him that she also had hardly a
gasp of hope in her heart. There he paused for a moment, and then
looking up into her face, he spoke but one word more. 'But,' said
he--and there he stopped. It was clearly told in that 'but'. Thus would
he do if Mary would declare that she did not care for him. If, however,
she could not bring herself so to declare, then was he ready to throw
his father and mother to the winds; then would he stand his ground; then
would he look all other difficulties in the face, sure that they might
finally be overcome. Poor Mary! the whole onus of settling the matter
was thus thrown upon her. She had only to say that he was indifferent to
her;--that was all.

If 'all the blood of the Howards' had depended upon it, she could not
have brought herself to utter such a falsehood.  Indifferent to her, as
he walked there by her donkey's side, talking thus earnestly of his
love for her!  Was he not to her like some god come from the heavens to
make her blessed? Did not the sun shine upon him with a halo, so that
he was bright as an angel?  Indifferent to her!  Could the open 
unadulterated truth have been practicable for her, she would have
declared her indifference in terms that would truly have astonished
him. As it was, she found it easier to say nothing.  She bit her lips
to keep herself from sobbing.  She struggled hard, but in vain, to
prevent her hands and feet from trembling.  She seemed to swing upon
her donkey as though like to fall, and would have given much to be upon
her own feet in the sward.

'Si la jeunesse savait . . .'  There is so much in that wicked old
French proverb!  Had Frank known more about a woman's mind--had he, that
is, been forty-two instead of twenty-two he would at once have been
sure of his game, and have felt that Mary's silence told him all he
wished to know. But then, had been forty-two instead of twenty-two, he
would not have been so ready to risk the acres of Greshamsbury for the
smiles of Mary Thorne.

'If you can't say one word to comfort me, I will go,' said he,
disconsolately.  'I made up my mind to tell you this, and so I came
over.  I told Lady Scatcherd I should not stay--not even for dinner.'

'I did not know you were so hurried,' said she, almost in a whisper.

On a sudden he stood still, and pulling the donkey's rein, caused him
to stand still also.  The beast required very little persuasion to be
so guided, and obligingly remained meekly passive.

'Mary, Mary!' said Frank, throwing his arms round her knees as she sat
upon her steed, and pressing his face against her body. 'Mary, you were
always honest; be honest now.  I love you with all my heart.  Will you
be my wife?'

But still Mary said not a word.  She no longer bit her lips; she was
beyond that, and was now using all her efforts to prevent her tears
from falling absolutely on her lover's face. She said nothing.  She
could no more rebuke him now and send him from her than she could
encourage him.  She could only sit there shaking and crying and wishing
she was on the ground.  Frank, on the whole, rather liked the donkey. 
It enabled him to approach somewhat nearer to an embrace than he might
have found practicable had they both been on their feet.  The donkey
himself was quite at his ease, and looked as though he was approvingly
conscious of what was going on behind his ears.

'I have a right to a word, Mary; say, "Go", and I will leave you at
once.'

But Mary did not say 'Go'.  Perhaps she would have done so had she been
able; but just at present she could say nothing. This came from her
having failed to make up her mind in due time as to what course it
would best become her to follow.

'One word, Mary; one little word.  There, if you will not speak, here
is my hand.  If you will have it, let it lie in yours;--if not, push it
away.'  So saying, he managed to get the end of his fingers on to her
palm, and there it remained unrepulsed.  'La jeuness' was beginning to
get a lesson; experience when duly sought after sometimes comes early
in life.

In truth Mary had not strength to push the fingers away.  'My love, my
own, my own!' said Frank, presuming on this very negative sign of
acquiescence.  'My life, my own, my own Mary!' and then the hand was
caught hold of and was at his lips before an effort could be made to
save it from such treatment.

'Mary, look at me; say one word to me.'

There was a deep sigh, and then came the one word--'Oh, Frank!'

'Mr Gresham, I hope I have the honour of seeing you quite well,' said a
voice close to his ear.  'I beg to say that you are welcome to Boxall
Hill.' Frank turned round and instantly found himself shaking hands
with Sir Louis Scatcherd.

How Mary got over her confusion Frank never saw, for he had enough to
do to get over his own.  He involuntarily deserted Mary and began
talking very fast to Sir Louis.  Sir Louis did not once look at Miss
Thorne, but walked back towards the house with Mr Gresham, sulky enough
in temper, but still making some effort to do the fine gentleman. Mary,
glad to be left alone, merely occupied herself with sitting on the 
donkey; and the donkey, when he found that the two gentlemen went
towards the house, for company's sake and for his stable's sake,
followed after them.

Frank stayed but three minutes in the house; gave another kiss to Lady
Scatcherd, getting three in return, and thereby infinitely disgusting
Sir Louis, shook hands, anything but warmly, with the young baronet,
and just felt the warmth of Mary's hand within his own.  He felt also
the warmth of her eyes' last glance, and rode home a happy man.



CHAPTER XXX

POST PRANDIAL

Frank rode home a happy man, cheering himself, as successful lovers do
cheer themselves, with the brilliancy of his late exploit: nor was it
till he had turned the corner into the Greshamsbury stables that he
began to reflect what he would do next.  It was all very well to have
induced Mary to allow his three fingers to lie half a minute in her
soft hand; the having done so might certainly be sufficient evidence
that he had overcome one of the lions in his path; but it could hardly
be said that all his difficulties were now smoothed.  How was he to
make further progress?

To Mary, also, the same ideas no doubt occurred--with many others.  But,
then, it was not for Mary to make any progress in the matter.  To her
at least belonged this passive comfort, that at present no act hostile
to the De Courcy interest would be expected from her.  All that she
could do would be to tell her uncle so much as it was fitting that he 
should know.  The doing this would doubtless be in some degree
difficult; but it was not probable that there would be much difference,
much of anything but loving anxiety for each other, between her and Dr
Thorne.  One other thing, indeed, she must do; Frank must be made to
understand what her birth had been.  'This,' she said to herself, 'will
give him an opportunity of retracting what he has done should he choose
to avail himself of it.  It is well he should have such opportunity.'

But Frank had more than this to do.  He had told Beatrice that he would
make no secret of his love, and he fully resolved to be as good as his
word.  To his father he owed an unreserved confidence; and he was fully
minded to give it.  It was, he knew, altogether out of the question
that he should at once marry a portionless girl without his father's 
consent; probably out of the question that he should do so even with
it.  But he would, at any rate, tell his father, and then decide as to
what should be done next.  So resolving, he put his black horse into
the stable and went into dinner.  After dinner he and his father would
be alone.

Yes; after dinner he and his father would be alone.  He dressed himself
hurriedly, for the dinner-bell was almost on the stroke as he entered
the house.  He said this to himself once and again; but when the meats
and the puddings, and then the cheese were borne away, as the decanters
were placed before his father, and Lady Arabella sipped her one glass
of claret, and his sisters ate their portion of strawberries, his
pressing anxiety for the coming interview began to wax somewhat dull.

His mother and sisters, however, rendered him no assistance by
prolonging their stay.  With unwonted assiduity he pressed a second
glass of claret on his mother.  But Lady Arabella was not only
temperate in her habits, but also at the present moment very angry with
her son.  She thought that he had been to Boxall Hill, and was only
waiting a proper moment to cross-question him sternly on the subject. 
Now she departed, taking her train of daughters with her.

'Give me one big gooseberry,' said Nina, as she squeezed herself in
under her brother's arm, prior to making her retreat.  Frank would
willingly have given her a dozen of the biggest, had she wanted them;
but having got the one, she squeezed herself out again and scampered
off. 

The squire was very cheery this evening; from what cause cannot now be
said.  Perhaps he had succeeded in negotiating a further loan, thus
temporarily sprinkling a drop of water over the ever-rising dust of his
difficulties.

'Well, Frank, what have you been after to-day?  Peter told me you had
the black horse out,' said he, pushing the decanter to his son.  'Take
my advice, my boy, and don't give him too much summer road-work.  Legs
won't stand it, let them be ever so good.'

'Why, sir, I was obliged to go out to-day, and therefore, it had to be
either the old mare or the young horse.'

'Why didn't you take Ramble?'  Now Ramble was the squire's own saddle
hack, used for farm surveying, and occasionally for going to cover.

'I shouldn't think of doing that, sir.'

'My dear boy, he is quite at your service; for goodness' sake do let me
have a little wine, Frank--quite at your service; any riding I have now
is after the haymakers, and that's all on the grass.'

'Thank'ee, sir.  Well, perhaps I will take a turn out of Ramble should
I want it.'

'Do, and pray, pray take care of that black horse's legs.  He's turning
out more of a horse than I took him to be, and I should be sorry to see
him injured.  Where have you been to-day?'

'Well, father, I have something to tell you.'

'Something to tell me!' and then the squire's happy and gay look, which
had been only rendered more happy and more gay by his assumed anxiety
about the black horse, gave place to a heaviness of visage which
acrimony and misfortune had made so habitual to him.  'Something to
tell me!'  Any grave words like these always presaged some money
difficulty to the squire's ears.  He loved Frank with the tenderest
love.  He would have done so under almost any circumstances; but, 
doubtless, that love had been made more palpable to himself by the fact
that Frank had been a good son as regards money--not exigeant as was
Lady Arabella, or selfishly reckless as was his nephew Lord Porlock. 
But now Frank must be in some difficulty about money. This was his
first idea.  'What is it, Frank; you have seldom had anything to say
that has not been pleasant for me to hear?'  And then the heaviness of 
visage again gave way for a moment as his eye fell upon his son.

'I have been to Boxall Hill, sir.'

The tenor of his father's thoughts was changed in an instant; and the
dread of immediate temporary annoyance gave place to true anxiety for
his son.  He, the squire, had been no party to Mary's exile from his
own domain; and he had seen