 with pain that she had now a second time
been driven from her home: but he had never hitherto questioned the
expediency of separating his son from Mary Thorne.  Alas!  it had
become too necessary--too necessary through his own default--that Frank
should marry money!

'At Boxall Hill, Frank!  Has that been prudent?  Or, indeed, has it
been generous to Miss Thorne, who has been driven there, as it were, by
your imprudence?'

'Father, it is well that we should understand each other about this--'

'Fill your glass, Frank;' Frank mechanically did as he was told, and
passed the bottle.

'I should never forgive myself were I to deceive you, or keep anything
from you.'

'I believe it is not in your nature to deceive me, Frank.'

'The fact is, sir, that I have made up my mind that Mary Thorne shall
be my wife--sooner or later, that is, unless, of course, she should
utterly refuse.  Hitherto, she has utterly refused me.  I believe I may
now say that she has accepted me.'

The squire sipped his claret, but at the moment said nothing. There was
a quiet, manly, but yet modest determination about his son that he had
hardly noticed before.  Frank had become legally of age, legally a man,
when he was twenty-one.  Nature, it seems, had postponed the ceremony
till he was twenty-two.  Nature often does postpone the ceremony even
to a much later age;--sometimes, altogether forgets to accomplish it.

The squire continued to sip his claret; he had to think over the matter
a while before he could answer a statement so deliberately made by his
son.

'I think I may say so,' continued Frank, with perhaps unnecessary
modesty.  'She is so honest that, had she not intended it, she would
have said so honestly.  Am I right, father, in thinking that, as
regards Mary, personally, you would not reject her as a
daughter-in-law?'

'Personally!' said the squire, glad to have the subject presented to
him in a view that enabled him to speak out.  'Oh, no; personally, I
should not object to her, for I love her dearly.  She is a good girl. I
do believe she is a good girl in every respect.  I have always liked
her; liked to see her about the house.  But--'

'I know what you would say, father.'  This was rather more than the
squire knew himself.  'Such a marriage is imprudent.'

'It is more than that, Frank; I fear that is impossible.'

'Impossible!  No, father; it is not impossible.'

'It is impossible, Frank, in the usual sense.  What are you to live
upon?  What would you do with your children?  You would not wish to see
your wife distressed and comfortless.'

'No, I should not like to see that.'

'You would not wish to begin life as an embarrassed man and end it as a
ruined man.  If you were now to marry Miss Thorne such would, I fear,
doubtless be your lot.'

Frank caught at the word 'now'.  'I don't expect to marry immediately. 
I know that would be imprudent.  But I am pledged, father, and I
certainly cannot go back.  And now that I have told you all this, what
is your advice to me?'

The father again sat silent, still sipping his wine.  There was nothing
in his son that he could be ashamed of, nothing that he could meet with
anger, nothing that he could not love; but how should he answer him? 
The fact was, that the son had more in him than the father; this his
mind and spirit were of a calibre not to be opposed successfully by the
mind and the spirit of the squire.

'Do you know Mary's history?' said Mr Gresham, at last; 'the history of
her birth?'

'Not a word of it,' said Frank.  'I did not know she had a history.'

'Nor does she know it; at least, I presume not.  But you should know it
now. And, Frank, I will tell it you; not to turn you from her--not with
that object, though I think that, to a certain extent, it should have
that effect. Mary's birth was not such that would become your wife, and
be beneficial to your children.'

'If so, father, I should have known it sooner.  Why was she brought
here among us?'

'True, Frank.  The fault is mine; mine and your mother's.  
Circumstances brought it all about years ago, when it never occurred to
us that all this would arise.  But I will tell you her history.  And,
Frank, remember this, though I tell it you as a secret, a secret to be
kept from all the world but one, you are quite at liberty to let the
doctor know I have told you.  Indeed, I shall be careful to let him
know myself should it ever be necessary that he and I should speak 
together as to this engagement.'  The squire then told his son the
whole story of Mary's birth, as it is known to the reader.

Frank sat silent, looking very blank; he also had, as had every
Gresham, a great love for his pure blood.  He had said to his mother
that he hated money, that he hated the estate; but he would have been
very slow to say, even in his warmest opposition to her, that he hated
the roll of the family pedigree.  He loved it dearly, though he seldom
spoke of it;--as men of good family seldom do speak of it.  It is one
of those possessions which to have is sufficient.  A man having it need
not boast of what he has, or show it off before the world.  But on that
account he values it more.  He had regarded Mary as a cutting duly
taken from the Ullathorne tree; not, indeed, as a grafting branch, full
of flower, just separated from the parent stalk, but as being not a
whit the less truly endowed with the pure sap of that venerable trunk. 
When, therefore, he heard her true history he sat awhile dismayed.

'It is a sad story,' said the father.

'Yes, sad enough,' said Frank, rising from his chair and standing with
it before him, leaning on the back of it.  'Poor Mary, poor mary!   She
will have to learn it some day.'

'I fear so, Frank;' and then there was again a few moments' silence.

'To me, father, it is told too late.  It can now have no effect on me. 
Indeed,' said he, sighing as he spoke, but still relieving himself by
the very sigh, 'it could have had no effect had I learned it ever so
soon.'

'I should have told you before,' said the father; 'certainly I ought to
have done so.'

'It would have been no good,' said Frank.  'Ah, sir, tell me this: who
were Miss Dunstable's parents?  What was that fellow Moffat's family?'

This was perhaps cruel of Frank.  The squire, however, made no answer
to the question.  'I have thought it right to tell you,' said he.  'I
leave all the commentary to yourself.  I need not tell you what your
mother will think.'

'What did she think of miss Dunstable's birth?' said he, again more
bitterly than before. 'No, sir,' he continued, after a further pause.
'All that can make no change; none at any rate now. It can't make my
love less, even if it could have prevented it. Nor, even, could it do
so--which it can't in the least, not in the least--but could it do so,
it could not break my engagement. I am now engaged to Mary Thorne.'

And then he again repeated his question, asking for his father's advice
under the present circumstances.  The conversation was a very long one,
as long as to disarrange all Lady Arabella's plans.  She had determined
to take her son more stringently to task that very evening; and with
this object had ensconced herself in the small drawing-room which had
formerly been used for a similar purpose by the august countess
herself. Here she now sat, having desired Augusta and Beatrice, as well
as the twins, to beg Frank to go to her as soon as he should come out
of the dining-room.  Poor lady! there she waited till ten
o'clock,--tealess.  There was not much of the Bluebeard about the
squire; but he had succeeded in making it understood through the
household that he was not to be interrupted by messages from his wife
during the post-prandial hour, which, though no toper, he loved so
well.

As a period of twelve months will now have to be passed over, the
upshot of this long conversation must be told in as few words as
possible.  The father found it impracticable to talk his son out of his
intended marriage; indeed, he hardly attempted to do so by any direct
persuasion.  He explained to him that it was impossible that he should
marry at once, and suggested that he, Frank, was very young.

'You married, sir, before you were one-and-twenty,' said Frank. Yes and
repented before I was two-and-twenty.  So did not say the squire.

He suggested that Mary should have time to ascertain what would be her
uncle's wishes, and ended by inducing Frank to promise, that after
taking his degree in October he would go abroad for some months, and
that he would not indeed return to Greshamsbury until he was
three-and-twenty.

'He may perhaps forget her,' said the father to himself.

'He thinks that I shall forget her,' said Frank to himself at the same
time; 'but he does not know me.'

When Lady Arabella at last got hold of her son she found that the time
for her preaching had utterly gone by.  He told he, almost with
sang-froid, what his plans were; and when she came to understand them,
and to understand also what had taken place at Boxall Hill, she could
not blame the squire for what he had done.  She also said to herself,
more confidently than the squire had done, that Frank would quite 
forget Mary before the year was out.  'Lord Buckish,' said she to
herself, rejoicingly, 'is now with the ambassador at Paris'--Lord
Buckish was her nephew--'and with him Frank will meet women that are
really beautiful--women of fashion.  When with Lord Buckish he will 
soon forget Mary Thorne.'

But not on this account did she change her resolve to follow up to the
furthest point her hostility to the Thornes.  She was fully enabled now
to do so, for Dr Fillgrave was already reinstated at Greshamsbury as
her medical adviser.

One other short visit did Frank pay to Boxall Hill, and one interview
had he with Dr Thorne.  Mary told him all she knew of her own sad
history, and was answered only by a kiss,--a kiss absolutely not in any
way by her to be avoided; the first, and only one, that had ever yet
reached her lips from his.  And then he went away.

The doctor told him the full story.  'Yes,' said Frank, 'I knew it all
before.  Dear Mary, dearest Mary!  Don't you, doctor, teach yourself to
believe that I shall forget her.'  And then also he went his way from
him--went his way also from Greshamsbury, and was absent for the full
period of the allotted banishment--twelve months, namely, and a day.



CHAPTER XXXI

THE SMALL EDGE OF THE WEDGE

Frank Gresham was absent from Greshamsbury twelve months and a day: a
day is always added to the period of such absences, as shown in the
history of Lord Bateman and other noble heroes.  We need not detail all
the circumstances of his banishment, all the details of the compact
that was made.  One detail of course was this, that there should be no 
corresponding; a point to which the squire found some difficulty in
bringing his son to assent.

It must not be supposed that Mary Thorne or the doctor were in any way
parties to, or privy to these agreements.  By no means. The agreements
were drawn out, and made, and signed, and sealed at Greshamsbury, and
were known nowhere else.  The reader must not imagine that Lady
Arabella was prepared to give up her son, if only his love could remain
constant for one year.  Neither did Lady Arabella consent to any such 
arrangement, nor did the squire.  It was settled rather in this wise:
that Frank should be subjected to no torturing process, pestered to
give no promises, should in no way be bullied about Mary--that is, not
at present--if he would go away for a year.  Then, at the end of the
year, the matter should again be discussed.  Agreeing to this, Frank
took his departure, and was absent as per agreement.

What were Mary's fortunes immediately after his departure must be
shortly told, and then we will again join some of our Greshamsbury
friends at a period about a month before Frank's return.

When Sir Louis saw Frank Gresham standing by Mary's donkey, with his
arms round Mary's knees, he began to fear that there must be something
in it.  He had intended that very day to throw himself at Mary's feet,
and now it appeared to his inexperienced eyes as though somebody else
had been at the same work before him.  This not unnaturally made him
cross; so, after having sullenly wished his visitor good-bye, he betook
himself to his room, and there drank curacoa alone, instead of coming
down to dinner.

This he did for two or three days, and then, taking heart of grace, he
remembered that, after all, he had many advantages over young Gresham. 
In the first place, he was a baronet, and could make his wife a
'lady'.  In the next place, Frank's father was alive and like to live,
whereas his own was dead. He possessed Boxall Hill in his own right,
but his rival had neither house nor land of his own.  After all, might
it not be possible for him also to put his arm round Mary's knees;--her
knees, or her waist, or, perhaps, even her neck?  Faint heart never won
fair lady.  At any rate, he would try.

And he did try.  With what result, as regards Mary, need hardly be
told.  He certainly did not get nearly so far as putting his hand even
upon her knee before he was made to understand that it 'was no go', as
he graphically described it to his mother. He tried once and again.  On
the first time Mary was very civil, though very determined.  On the
second, she was more determined, though less civil; and then she told 
him, that if he pressed her further he would drive her from her
mother's house.  There was something then about Mary's eye, a fixed
composure round her mouth, and an authority in her face, which went far
to quell him; and he did not press her again.

He immediately left Boxall Hill, and, returning to London, had more
violent recourse to the curacoa.  It was not long before the doctor
heard of him, and was obliged to follow him, and then again occurred
those frightful scenes in which the poor wretch had to expiate, either
in terrible delirium or more terrible prostration of spirits, the vile
sin which his father had so early taught him.

Then Mary returned to her uncle's home.  Frank was gone, and she
therefore could resume her place at Greshamsbury.  Yes, she came back
to Greshamsbury; but Greshamsbury was by no means the same place that
it was formerly.  Almost all intercourse was now over between the
doctor and the Greshamsbury people.  He rarely ever saw the squire, and
then only on business.  Not that the squire had purposely quarrelled
with him; but Dr Thorne himself had chosen that it should be so, since
Frank had openly proposed to his niece.  Frank was now gone, and Lady
Arabella was in arms against him.  It should not be said that he kept
up any intimacy for the sake of aiding the lovers in their love.  No
one should rightfully accuse him of inveigling the heir to marry his 
niece.

Mary, therefore, found herself utterly separated from Beatrice. She was
not even able to learn what Beatrice would think, or did think, of the
engagement as it now stood.  She could not even explain to her friend
that love had been too strong for her, and endeavour to get some
comfort from that friend's absolution from her sin.  This estrangement
was now carried so far that she and Beatrice did not even meet on 
neutral ground. Lady Arabella made it known to Miss Oriel that her
daughter could not meet Mary Thorne, even as strangers meet; and it was
made known to others also.  Mrs Yates Umbleby, and her dear friend Miss
Gushing, to whose charming tea-parties none of the Greshamsbury ladies
went above once in a twelvemonth, talked through the parish of this
distressing difficulty.  They would have been so happy to have asked
dear Mary Thorne, only the Greshamsbury ladies did not approve.

Mary was thus tabooed from all society in the place in which a
twelvemonth since she had been, of all its denizens, perhaps the most
courted.  In those days, no bevy of Greshamsbury young ladies had
fairly represented the Greshamsbury young ladyhood if Mary Thorne was
not there.  Now she was excluded from all such bevies.  Patience did
not quarrel with her, certainly;--came to see her frequently;--invited
her to walk;--invited her frequently to the parsonage. But Mary was shy
of acceding to such invitations and at last frankly told her friend
Patience, that she would not again break bread in Greshamsbury in any
house in which she was not thought fit to meet the other guests who
habitually resorted there.

In truth, both the doctor and his niece were very sore, but there were
of that temperament that keeps all its soreness to itself.  Mary walked
out by herself boldly, looking at least as though she were indifferent
to all the world.  She was, indeed, hardly treated.  Young ladies'
engagements are generally matters of profoundest secrecy, and are
hardly known of by their near friends till marriage is a thing 
settled.  But all the world knew of Mary's engagement within a month of
that day on which she had neglected to expel Frank's finger from her
hand; it had been told openly through the country-side that she had
confessed her love for the young squire.  Now it is disagreeable for a
young lady to walk about under such circumstances, especially so when
she has no female friend to keep her in countenance, more especially so
when the gentleman is such importance in the neighbourhood as Frank was
in that locality.  It was a matter of moment to every farmer, and every
farmer's wife, which bride Frank should marry of those bespoken for
him; Mary, namely, or Money.  Every yokel about the place had been made
to understand that, by some feminine sleight of hand, the doctor's
niece had managed to trap Master Frank, and that Master Frank had been
sent out of the way so that he might, if yet possible, break through
the trapping.  All this made life rather unpleasant for her.

One day, walking solitary in the lanes, she met that sturdy farmer to
whose daughter she had in former days been so serviceable.  'God bless
'ee, Miss Mary,' said he--he always bid God bless her when he saw her. 
'And, Miss Mary, to say my mind out freely, thee be quite gude enough
for un, quite gude enough; so thee be'st tho'f he were ten squoires.'  
There may, perhaps, have been something pleasant in the heartiness of
this; but it was not pleasant to have this heart affair of hers thus
publicly scanned and talked over: to have it known to every one that
she had set her heart on marrying Frank gem, and that all the Greshams
had set their hearts in preventing it.  And yet she could in nowise
help it.  No girl could have been more staid and demure, less 
demonstrative and boastful about her love.  She had never yet spoken
freely, out of her full heart, to one human being.  'Oh, Frank!'  All
her spoken sin had been contained in that.

But Lady Arabella had been very active.  It suited her better that it
should be known, far and wide, that a nameless pauper--Lady Arabella
only surmised that her foe was nameless; but she did not scruple to
declare it--was intriguing to catch the heir of Greshamsbury.  None of
the Greshams must meet Mary Thorne; that was the edict sent out about
the county; and the edict was well understood.  Those, therefore, were 
bad days for Miss Thorne.

She had never yet spoken on the matter freely, out of her full heart to
one human being.  Not to one?  Not to him?  Not to her uncle?  No, not
even to him, fully and freely.  She had told him that that had passed
between Frank and her which amounted, at any rate on his part, to a
proposal.

'Well, dearest, and what was your answer?' said her uncle, drawing her
close to him, and speaking in his kindest voice.

'I hardly made an answer, uncle.'

'You did not reject him, Mary?'

'No, uncle,' and then she paused;--he had never known her tremble as 
she now trembled.  'But if you say that I ought, I will,' she added,
drawing every word from herself with difficulty.

'I say you ought, Mary!   Nay; but this question you must answer
yourself.'

'Must I?' said she, plaintively.  And then she sat for the next half
hour with her head against his shoulder; but nothing more was said
about it.  They both acquiesced in the sentence that had been
pronounced against them, and went on together more lovingly than
before.

The doctor was quite as weak as his niece; nay, weaker.  She hesitated
fearfully as to what she ought to do: whether she should obey her heart
or the dictates of Greshamsbury.  But he had other doubts than hers,
which nearly set him wild when he strove to bring his mind to a
decision.  He himself was now in possession--of course as a trustee
only--of the title-deeds of the estate; more of the estate, much more,
belonged to the heirs under Sir Roger Scatcherd's will than to the 
squire.  It was now more than probable that that heir must be Mary
Thorne. His conviction became stronger and stronger that no human
effort would keep Sir Louis in the land of the living till he was
twenty-five.  Could he, therefore, wisely or honestly, in true
friendship to the squire, to Frank, or to his niece, take any steps to
separate two persons who loved each other, and whose marriage would in
human probability be so suitable?

And yet he could not bring himself to encourage it then.  The idea of
'looking after dead man's shoes' was abhorrent to his mind, especially
when the man whose death he contemplated had been so trusted to him as
had been Sir Louis Scatcherd.  He could not speak of the event, even to
the squire, as being possible.  So he kept his peace from day to day,
and gave no counsel to Mary in the matter.

And then he had his own individual annoyances, and very aggravating
annoyances they were.  The carriage--or rather the post-chaise--of Dr
Fillgrave was now frequent in Greshamsbury, passing him constantly in
the street, among the lanes, and on the high roads.  It seemed as
though Dr Fillgrave could never get to his patients at the big house
without showing himself to his beaten rival, either on is way thither
or on his return.  This alone would, perhaps, not have hurt the doctor 
much; but it did hurt him to know that Dr Fillgrave was attending the
squire for a little incipient gout, and that dear Nina was in measles
under those unloving hands.

And then, also, the old-fashioned phaeton, of old-fashioned old Dr
Century was seen to rumble up to the big house, and it became known
that Lady Arabella was not very well.  'Not very well,' when pronounced
in a low, grave voice about Lady Arabella, always meant something
serious.  And, in this case, something serious was meant.  Lady
Arabella was not only ill, but frightened.  It appeared even to her,
that Dr Fillgrave hardly knew what he was about, that he was not so
sure in his opinion, so confident in himself as Dr Thorne used to be.  
how should he be, seeing that Dr Thorne had medically had Lady Arabella
in his hands for the last ten years?

If sitting with dignity in his hired carriage, and stepping with
authority up the big front steps, would have done anything, Dr
Fillgrave might have done much.  Lady Arabella was greatly taken with
his looks when he first came to her, and it was only when she by
degrees that the symptoms, which she knew so well, did not yield to him
that she began to doubt those looks.

After a while Dr Fillgrave himself suggested Dr Century.  'Not that I
fear anything, Lady Arabella,' said he,--lying hugely, for he did fear;
fear both for himself and for her.  'But Dr Century has great
experience, and in such a matter, when the interests are so important,
one cannot be too safe.'

So Dr Century came and toddled slowly into her ladyship's room. He did
not say much; he left the talking to his learned brother, who certainly
was able to do that part of the business.  But Dr Century, though he
said very little, looked very grave, and by no means quieted Lady
Arabella's mind.  She, as she saw the two putting their heads together,
already had misgivings that she had done wrong.  She knew that she 
could not be safe without Dr Thorne at her bedside, and she already
felt that she had exercised a most injudicious courage in driving him
away.

'Well, doctor?' said she, as soon as Dr Century had toddled downstairs
to see the squire.

'Oh!  we shall be all right, Lady Arabella; all right, very soon.  But
we must be careful, very careful; I am glad I've had Dr Century here,
very; but there's nothing to alter; little or nothing.'

There was but few words spoken between Dr Century and the squire; but
few as they were, they frightened Mr Gresham.  When Dr Fillgrave came
down the grand stairs, a servant waited at the bottom to ask him also
to go to the squire.  Now there never had been much cordiality between
the squire and Dr Fillgrave, though Mr Gresham had consented to take a 
preventative pill from his hands, and the little man therefore swelled
himself out somewhat more than ordinarily as he followed the servant.

'Dr Fillgrave,' said the squire, at once beginning the conversation,
'Lady Arabella, is I fear, in danger?'

'Well, no; I hope not in danger, Mr Gresham.  I certainly believe I may
be justified in expressing a hope that she is not in danger.  Her state
is, no doubt, rather serious;--rather serious--as Dr Century has
probably told you;' and Dr Fillgrave made a bow to the old man, who sat
quiet in one of the dining-room arm-chairs.

'Well, doctor,' said the squire, 'I have not any grounds on which to
doubt your judgement.'

Dr Fillgrave bowed, but with the stiffest, slightest inclination which
a head could possibly make.  He rather thought that Mr Gresham had no
ground for doubting his judgement.

'Nor do I.'

The doctor bowed, and a little, a very little less stiffly.

'But, doctor, I think that something ought to be done.'

The doctor this time did his bowing merely with his eyes and mouth. The
former he closed for a moment, the latter he pressed; and then
decorously rubbed his hands one over the other.

'I am afraid, Dr Fillgrave, that you and my friend Thorne are not the
best friends in the world.'

'No, Mr Gresham, no; I may go so far as to say we are not.'

'Well, I am sorry for it--'

'Perhaps, Mr Gresham, we need hardly discuss it; but there have been
circumstances--'

'I am not going to discuss anything, Dr Fillgrave; I say I am sorry for
it, because I believe that prudence will imperatively require Lady
Arabella to have Doctor Thorne back again.  Now, if you would not
object to meet him--'

'Mr Gresham, I beg pardon; I beg pardon, indeed; but you must really
excuse me.  Doctor Thorne has, in my estimation--'

'But, Doctor Fillgrave--'

'Mr Gresham, you really must excuse me; you really must, indeed.
Anything else that I could do for Lady Arabella, I should be most happy
to do; but after what has passed, I cannot meet Doctor Thorne; I really
cannot. You must not ask me to do so; Mr Gresham. And, Mr Gresham,'
continued the doctor, 'I did understand from Lady Arabella that
his--that is, Dr Thorne's--conduct to her ladyship had been such--so
very outrageous, I may say, that--that--that--of course, Mr Gresham, you
know best; but I did think that Lady Arabella herself was quite
unwilling to see Doctor Thorne again;' and Dr Fillgrave looked very big,
and very dignified, and very exclusive.

The squire did not ask again.  He had no warrant for supposing that
Lady Arabella would receive Dr Thorne if he did come; and he saw that
it was useless to attempt to overcome the rancour of the man so
pig-headed as the little Galen now before him.  Other propositions were
then broached, and it was at last decided that assistance should be
sought for from London, in the person of the great Sir Omicron Pie.

Sir Omicron came, and Drs Fillgrave and Century were there to meet
him.  When they all assembled in Lady Arabella's room, the poor woman's
heart almost sand within her,--as well it might, at such a sight.  If
she could only reconcile it with her honour, her consistency, with her
high De Courcy principles, to send once more for Dr Thorne.  Oh,
Frank!  Frank!  to what misery your disobedience brought your mother!

Sir Omicron and the lesser provincial lights had their consultation,
and the lesser lights went their way to Barchester and Silverbridge,
leaving Sir Omicron to enjoy the hospitality of Greshamsbury.

'You should have Thorne back here, Mr Gresham,' said Sir Omicron,
almost in a whisper, when they were quite alone.  'Doctor Fillgrave is
a very good man, and so is Dr Century; very good, I'm sure.  But Thorne
has known her ladyship so long.'  And then, on the following morning,
Sir Omicron also went his way.

And then there was a scene between the squire and her ladyship. Lady
Arabella had given herself credit for great good generalship when she
found that the squire had been induced to take that pill.  We have all
heard of the little end of the wedge, and we have most of us an idea
that the little end is the difficulty.  That pill had been the little 
end of Lady Arabella's wedge.  Up to that period she had been 
struggling in vain to make a severance between her husband and her
enemy.  That pill should do the business.  She well knew how to make
the most of it; to have it published in Greshamsbury that the squire
had put his gouty toe into Dr Fillgrave's hands; how to let it be
known--especially at that humble house in the corner of the street--that
Fillgrave's prescriptions now ran current through the whole 
establishment.  Dr Thorne did hear of it, and did suffer.  He had been
a true friend to the squire, and he thought the squire should have
stood to him more staunchly.

'After all,' said he himself, 'perhaps it's as well--perhaps it will be
best that I should leave this place altogether.'  And then he thought
of Sir Roger and his will, and of Mary and her lover.  And then of
Mary's birth, and of his own theoretical doctrines as to pure blood. 
And so his troubles multiplied, and he saw no present daylight through
them.

Such had been the way in which Lady Arabella had got in the little end
of the wedge.  And she would have triumphed joyfully had not her
increased doubts and fears as to herself then come in to check her
triumph and destroy her joy.  She had not yet confessed to any one her
secret regret for the friend she had driven away.  She hardly yet
acknowledged to herself that she did regret him; but she was uneasy, 
frightened, and in low spirits.

'My dear,' said the squire, sitting down by her bedside, 'I want to
tell you what Sir Omicron said as he went away.'

'Well?' said her ladyship, sitting up and looking frightened.

'I don't know how you may take it, Bell; but I think it very good
news:' the squire never called his wife Bell, except when he wanted her
to be on particularly good terms with him.

'Well?' she said again.  She was not over-anxious to be gracious, and
did not reciprocate his familiarity.

'Sir Omicron says that you should have Thorne back again, and upon my
honour, I cannot but agree with him.  Now, Thorne is a clever man, a
very clever man; nobody denies that; and then, you know--'

'Why did not Sir Omicron say that to me?' said her ladyship, sharply,
all her disposition in Dr Thorne's favour becoming wonderfully damped
by her husband's advocacy.

'I suppose he thought it better to say it to me,' said the squire.

'He should have spoken to myself,' said Lady Arabella, who, though she
did not absolutely doubt her husband's word, gave him credit for having
induced and led on Sir Omicron to the uttering of the opinion.  'Doctor
Thorne has behaved to me in so gross, so indecent a manner!  And then,
as I understand, he is absolutely encouraging that girl--'

'Now, Bell, you are quite wrong--'

'Of course I am; I always am quite wrong.'

'Quite wrong in mixing up two things; Doctor Thorne as an acquaintance,
and Dr Thorne as a doctor.'

'It is dreadful to have him here, even standing in the room with me. 
How can one talk to one's doctor openly and confidentially when one
looks upon him as one's worst enemy?' And Lady Arabella, softening,
almost melted with tears.

'My dear, you cannot wonder that I should be anxious for you.'

Lady Arabella gave a little snuffle, which might be taken as a not very
eloquent expression of thanks for the squire's solicitude, or as an
ironical jeer at his want of sincerity.

'And, therefore, I have not lost a moment in telling you what Sir
Omicron said.  "You should have Thorne back here;" those were his very
words.  You can think it over, my dear.  And remember this, Bell; if he
is to do any good no time is to be lost.'

And then the squire left the room, and Lady Arabella remained alone,
perplexed by many doubts.



CHAPTER XXXII

MR ORIEL

I must now, shortly--as shortly as it is in my power to do it--introduce
a new character to my reader.  Mention has been made of the rectory of
Greshamsbury; but, hitherto, no opportunity has offered itself for the
Rev Caleb Oriel to come upon the boards.

Mr Oriel was a man of family and fortune, who, having gone to Oxford
with the usual views of such men, had become inoculated there with very
High-Church principles, and had gone into orders influenced by a
feeling of enthusiastic love for the priesthood.  He was by no means an
ascetic--such men, indeed, seldom are--nor was he a devotee.  He was a
man well able, and certainly willing to do the work of a parish 
clergyman; and when he became one, he was efficacious in his 
profession.  But it may perhaps be said of him, without speaking
slanderously, that his original calling, as a young man, was rather to
the outward and visible signs of religion than to its inward and
spiritual graces.

He delighted in lecterns and credence-tables, in services at dark hours
of winter mornings when no one would attend, in high waistcoats and
narrow white neckties, in chanted services and intoned prayers, and in
all the paraphernalia of Anglican formalities which have given such
offence to those of our brethren who live in daily fear of the scarlet
lady.  Many of his friends declared that Mr Oriel would sooner or later
deliver himself over body and soul to that lady; but there was no need
to fear for him: for though sufficiently enthusiastic to get out of bed
at five am on winter mornings--he did so, at least, all through his
first winter at Greshamsbury--he was not made of that stuff which is
necessary for a staunch, burning, self-denying convert.  It was not in 
him to change his very sleek black coat for a Capuchin's filthy
cassock, nor his pleasant parsonage for some dirty hole in Rome.  And
it was better so both for him and others. There are but few, very few,
to whom it is given to be a Huss, a Wickliffe, or a Luther; and a man
gains but little by being a false Huss, or a false Luther,--and his
neighbours gain less.

But certain lengths in self-privation Mr Oriel did go; at any rate, for
some time.  He eschewed matrimony, imagining that it became him as a
priest to do so.  He fasted rigorously on Fridays; and the neighbours
declared that he scourged himself.

Mr Oriel was, it has been said, a man of fortune; that is to say, when
he came of age he was master of thirty thousand pounds.  When he took
it into his head to go into the Church, his friends bought for him the
next presentation to the living at Greshamsbury; and, a year after his
ordination, the living falling in, Mr Oriel brought himself and his
sister to the rectory.

Mr Oriel soon became popular.  He was a dark-haired, good-looking man,
of polished manners, agreeable in society, not given to monkish
austerities--except in the matter of Fridays--nor yet to the Low-Church
severity of demeanour.  He was thoroughly a gentleman, good-humoured,
inoffensive, and sociable.  But he had one fault: he was not a marrying
man.

On this ground there was a feeling against him so strong as almost at
one time to throw him into serious danger.  It was not only that he
should be sworn against matrimony in his individual self--he whom fate
had made so able to sustain the weight of a wife and family; but what
an example he was setting!  If other clergymen all around should
declare against wives and families, what was to become of the country? 
What was to be done in the rural districts?  The religious observances,
as regards women, of a Brigham Young were hardly so bad as this!

There were around Greshamsbury very many unmarried ladies--I believe
there generally are so round must such villages.  From the great house
he did not receive much annoyance.  Beatrice was then only just on the
verge of being brought out, and was not perhaps inclined to think very
much of a young clergyman; and Augusta certainly intended to fly at 
higher game.  But there were the Miss Athelings, the daughters of a
neighbouring clergyman, who were ready to go all lengths with him in
High-Church matters, except as that one tremendously papal step of
celibacy; and the two Miss Hesterwells, of Hesterwell Park, the younger
of whom boldly declared her purpose of civilizing the savage; and Mrs
Opie Green, a very pretty widow, with a very pretty jointure, who lived
in a very pretty house about a mile from Greshamsbury, and who declared
her opinion that Mr Oriel was quite right in his view of a clergyman's
position.  How could a woman, situated as she was, have the comfort of
a clergyman's attention if he were to be regarded just as any other
man?  She could now know in what light to regard Mr Oriel, and would be
able without scruple to avail herself of his zeal.  So she did avail
herself of his zeal,--and that without any scruple.

And then there was Miss Gushing,--a young thing.  Miss Gushing had a
great advantage over the other competitors for the civilization of Mr
Oriel, namely, in this--that she was able to attend his morning
services.  If Mr Oriel was to be reached in any way, it was probable
that he might be reached in this way. If anything could civilize him,
this would do it.  Therefore, the young thing, through all one long, 
tedious winter, tore herself from her warm bed, and was to be seen--no,
not seen, but heard--entering Mr Oriel's church at six o'clock.  With
indefatigable assiduity the responses were made, uttered from under a
close bonnet, and out of a dark corner, in an enthusiastically feminine
voice, through the whole winter.

Nor did Miss Gushing altogether fail in her object.  When a clergyman's
daily audience consists of but one person, and that person is a young
lady, it is hardly possible that he should not become personally
intimate with her; hardly possible that he should not be in some
measure grateful.  Miss Gushing's responses came from her with such
fervour, and she begged for ghostly advice with such eager longing to
have her scruples satisfied, that Mr Oriel had nothing for it but to
give way to a certain amount of civilization.

By degrees it came to pass that Miss Gushing could never get her final
prayer said, her shawl and boa adjusted, and stow away her nice new
Prayer Book with the red letters inside, and the cross on the back,
till Mr Oriel had been into his vestry and got rid of his surplice. And
then they met at the church-porch, and naturally walked together till
Mr Oriel's cruel gateway separated them.  The young thing did sometimes
think that, as the parson's civilization progressed, he might have
taken the trouble to walk with her as far as Mrs Yates Umbleby's hall
door; but she had hope to sustain her, and a firm resolve to merit 
success, even though she might not attain it.

'It is not ten thousand pities,' she once said to him, 'that none here
should avail themselves of the inestimable privilege which your coming
has conferred upon us?  Oh, Mr Oriel, I do so wonder at it!  To me it
is so delightful!  The morning service in the dark church is so
beautiful, so touching!'

'I suppose they think it a bore getting up so early,' said Mr Oriel.

'Ah, a bore!' said Miss Gushing, in an enthusiastic tone of 
depreciation.  'How insensate they must be!  To me it gives a new charm
to life.  It quiets one for the day; makes one so fitter for one's
daily trials and daily troubles.  Does it not, Mr Oriel?'

'I look upon morning prayer as an imperative duty, certainly.'

'Oh, certainly, a most imperative duty; but so delicious at the same
time.  I spoke to Mrs Umbleby about it, but she said she could not
leave the children.'

'No: I dare say not,' said Mr Oriel.

'And Mr Umbleby said business kept him up so late at night.'

'Very probably.  I hardly expect the attendance of men of business.'

'But the servants might come, mightn't they, Mr Oriel?'

'I fear that servants seldom can have time for daily prayers in church.'

'Oh, ah, no; perhaps not.'  And then Miss Gushing began to bethink
herself of whom should be composed the congregation which it must be
presumed that Mr Oriel wished to see around him.  But on this matter he
did not enlighten her.

Then Miss Gushing took to fasting on Fridays, and made some futile
attempts to induce her priest to give her the comfort of confessional
absolution.  But, unfortunately, the zeal of the  master waxed cool as
that of the pupil waxed hot; and, at last, when the young thing
returned to Greshamsbury from an autumn excursion which she made with
Mrs Umbleby to Weston-super-Mare, she found that the delicious morning 
services had died a natural death.  Miss Gushing did not on that
account give up the game, but she was bound to fight with no particular
advantage in her favour.

Miss Oriel, though a good Churchwoman, was by no means a convert to her
brother's extremist views, and perhaps gave but scanty credit to the
Gushings, Athelings, and Opie Greens for the sincerity of their
religion.  But, nevertheless, she and her brother were staunch friends;
and she still hoped to see the day when he might be induced to think
that an English parson might get through his parish work with the
assistance of a wife better than he could do without such feminine 
encumbrance.  The girl whom she selected for his bride was not the
young thing, but Beatrice Gresham.

And at last it seemed probable to Mr Oriel's nearest friends that he
was in a fair way to be overcome.  Not that he had begun to make love
to Beatrice, or committed himself by the utterance of any opinion as to
the propriety of clerical marriages; but he daily became looser about
his peculiar tenets, raved less immoderately than heretofore as to the 
atrocity of the Greshamsbury church pews, and was observed to take some
opportunities of conversing alone with Beatrice.  Beatrice had always
denied the imputation--this had usually been  made by Mary in their
happy days--with the vehement asseverations of anger; and Miss Gushing
had tittered, and expressed herself as supposing that great people's
daughters might be as barefaced as they pleased.

All this had happened previous to the great Greshamsbury feud. Mr Oriel
gradually got himself into a way of sauntering up to the great house,
sauntering into the drawing-room for the purpose, as I am sure he
thought, of talking with Lady Arabella, and then of sauntering home
again, having usually found an opportunity for saying a few words to
Beatrice during the visit.  This went on all through the feud up to the
period of Lady Arabella's illness; and then one morning, about a month
before the date fixed for Frank's return, Mr Oriel found himself
engaged to Miss Beatrice Gresham.

From the day that Miss Gushing heard of it--which was not however for
some considerable time after this--she became an Independent Methodist. 
She could no longer, she said at first, have any faith in any religion;
and for an hour or so she was almost tempted to swear that she could no
longer have any faith in any man.  She had nearly completed a worked 
cover for a credence-table when the news reached her, as to which, in
the young enthusiasm of her heart, she had not been able to remain
silent; it had already been promised to Mr Oriel; that promise she
swore should not be kept.  He was an apostate, she said, from his
principles; an utter pervert; a false, designing man, with whom she
would never have trusted herself alone on dark mornings had she known
that he had such grovelling, worldly inclinations.  So Miss Gushing
became an Independent Methodist; the credence-table covering was cut up
into slippers for the preacher's feet; and the young thing herself,
more happy in this direction than she had been in the other, became the
arbiter of that preacher's domestic happiness.

But this little history of Miss Gushing's future life is premature.  Mr
Oriel became engaged demurely, nay, almost silently, to Beatrice, and
no one out of their own immediate families was at the time informed of
the matter.  It was arranged very differently from those other two
matches--embryo, or not embryo, those, namely, of Augusta with Mr 
Moffat, and Frank with Mary Thorne.  All Barsetshire had heard of them;
but that of Beatrice and Mr Oriel was managed in a much more private
manner.

'I do think you are a happy girl,' said Patience to her one morning.

'Indeed I am.'

'He is so good.  You don't know how good he is as yet; he never thinks
of himself, and thinks so much of those he loves.'

Beatrice took her friend's hand in her own and kissed it.  She was full
of joy.  When a girl is about to be married, when she may lawfully talk
of love, there is no music in her ears so sweet as the praises of her
lover.

'I made up my mind from the first that he should marry you.'

'Nonsense, Patience.'

'I did, indeed.  I made up my mind that he should marry; and there were
only two to choose from.'

'Me and Miss Gushing,' said Beatrice, laughing.

'No; not exactly Miss Gushing.  I had not many fears for Caleb there.'

'I declare she is very pretty,' said Beatrice, who could afford to be
good-natured.  Now Miss Gushing certainly was pretty; and would have
been very pretty had her nose not turned up so much, and could she have
parted her hair in the centre.

'Well, I am very glad you chose me;--if it was you who chose,' said
Beatrice, modestly; having, however, in her own mind a strong opinion
that Mr Oriel had chosen for himself, and had never any doubt in the
matter.  'And who was the other?'

'Can't you guess?'

'I won't guess any more; perhaps Mrs Green.'

'Oh, no; certainly not a widow.  I don't like widows marrying. But of
course you could guess if you would; of course it was Mary Thorne.  But
I soon saw Mary would not do, for two reasons; Caleb would never have
liked her well enough nor would she have ever liked him.'

'Not like him!  oh I hope she will; I do so love Mary Thorne.'

'So do I dearly; and so does Caleb; but he could never have loved her
as he loves you.'

'But, Patience, have you told Mary?'

'No, I have told no one, and shall not without your leave.'

'Ah, you must tell her.  Tell it her with my best, and kindest, warmest
love.  Tell her how happy I am, and how I long to talk to her.  Tell
that I will have her for my bridesmaid.  Oh!   I do hope that before
that all this horrid quarrel will be settled.

Patience undertook the commission, and did tell Mary; did give her also
the message which Beatrice had sent.  And Mary was rejoiced to hear it;
for though, as Patience had said of her, she had never herself felt any
inclination to fall in love with Mr Oriel, she believed him to be one
in whose hands her friend's happiness would be secure.  Then, by
degrees, the conversation changed from the loves of Mr Oriel and
Beatrice to the troubles of Frank Gresham and herself.

'She says that let what will happen you shall be one of her 
bridesmaids.'

'Ah, yes, dear Trichy!  that was settled between us in auld lang syne;
but those settlements are all unsettled now, and must be broken.  No, I
cannot be her bridesmaid; but I shall yet hope to see her once before
her marriage.'

'And why not be her bridesmaid?  Lady Arabella will hardly object to
that.'

'Lady Arabella!' said Mary, curling up her lip with deep scorn. 'I do
not care that for Lady Arabella,' and she let her silver thimble fall
from her fingers onto the table.  'If Beatrice invited me to her
wedding, she might manage as to that; I should ask no question as to
Lady Arabella.'

'Then why not come to it?'

She remained silent for a while, and then boldly answered.  'Though I
do not care for Lady Arabella, I do care for Mr Gresham:--and I do care
for his son.'

'But the squire always loved you.'

'Yes, and therefore I will not be there to vex his sight.  I will tell
you the truth, Patience.  I can never be in that house again till Frank
Gresham is a married man, or till I am about to be a married woman.  I
do not think they have treated me well, but I will not treat them ill.'

'I am sure you will not do that,' said Miss Oriel.

'I will endeavour not to do so; and, therefore, will go to none of
their fetes!  No, Patience.'  And then she turned her head to the arm
of the sofa, and silently, without audible sobs, hiding her face, she
endeavoured to get rid of the tears unseen.  For one moment she had all
but resolved to pour out the whole truth of her love into her friend's
ears; but suddenly she changed her mind.  Why should she talk of her
own unhappiness?  Why should she speak of her own love when she was
fully determined not to speak of Frank's promises.

'Mary, dear Mary.'

'Anything, but pity, Patience; anything but that,' said she, 
convulsively, swallowing her sobs, and rubbing away her tears. 'I
cannot bear that.  Tell Beatrice from me, that I wish her every
happiness; and, with such a husband, I am sure she will be happy.  I
wish her every joy; give her my kindest love; but tell her that I
cannot be at her marriage.  Oh, I should like to see her; not there,
you know, but here, in my own room, where I still have liberty to
speak.'

'But why should you decide now?  She is not to be married yet, you
know.'

'Now, or this day twelvemonth, can make no difference.  I will not go
into that house again, unless--but never mind; I will not go into it
all; never, never again.  If I could forgive her for myself, I could
not forgive her for my uncle. But tell me, Patience, might not Beatrice
now come here?  It is so dreadful to see her every Sunday in church
and never to speak to her, never to kiss her.  She seems to look away 
from me as though she too had chosen to quarrel with me.'

Miss Oriel promised to do her best.  She could not imagine, she said,
that such a visit could be objected to on such an occasion.  She would
not advise Beatrice to come without telling her mother; but she could
not think that Lady Arabella would be so cruel as to make any
objection, knowing, as she could not but know, that her daughter, when
married, would be at liberty to choose her own friends.

'Good-bye, Mary,' said Patience.  'I wish I knew how to say more to
comfort you.'

'Oh, comfort!  I don't want comfort.  I want to be let alone.'

'That's just it: you are so ferocious in your scorn, so unbending, so
determined to take all the punishment that comes in your way.'

'What I do take, I'll take without complaint,' said Mary; and then they
kissed each other and parted.



CHAPTER XXXIII

A MORNING VISIT

It must be remembered that Mary, among her miseries, had to suffer
this: that since Frank's departure, now nearly twelve months ago, she
had not heard a word about him; or rather, she had only heard that he
was very much in love with some lady in London.  This news reached her
in a manner so circuitous, and from such a doubtful source; it seemed
to her to savour so strongly of Lady Arabella's precautions, that she
attributed it at once to malice, and blew it to the winds.  It might
not improbably be the case that Frank was untrue to her; but she would
not take it for granted because she was now told so.  It was more than
probable that he should amuse himself with some one; flirting was his 
prevailing sin; and if he did flirt, the most would of course be made
of it.

But she found it to be very desolate to be thus left alone without a
word of comfort or a word of love; without being able to speak to any
one of what filled her heart; doubting, nay, more than doubting, being
all but sure that her passion must terminate in misery.  Why had she
not obeyed her conscience and her better instinct int hat moment when
the necessity for deciding had come upon her?  Why had she allowed him
to understand that he was master of her heart?  Did she not know that
there was everything against such a marriage as that which was
proposed?  Had she not d