one wrong, very wrong, even to think of it? Had
she not sinned deeply, against Mr Gresham, who had ever been so kind to
her?  Could she hope, was it possible, that a boy like Frank should be 
true to his first love?  And, if he were true, if he were ready to go
to the altar with her to-morrow, ought she to allow him to degrade
himself by such a marriage?

There was, alas!  some truth about the London lady.  Frank had taken
his degree, as arranged, and had then gone abroad for the winter, doing
the fashionable things, going up the Nile, crossing over to Mount
Sinai, thence over the long desert to Jerusalem, and home by Damascus,
Beyrout, and Constantinople, bringing back a long beard, a red cap, and
a chibook, just as our fathers used to go through Italy and 
Switzerland, and our grandfathers to spend a season in Paris. He had
then remained for a couple of months in London, going through all the
society which the De Courcys were able to open to him.  And it was true
that a certain belle of the season, of that season and some others, had
been captivated--for the tenth time--by the silken sheens of his long
beard.  Frank had probably been more demonstrative, perhaps, ever more
susceptible, than he should have been; and hence the rumour, which had
all too willingly been forwarded to Greshamsbury.

But young Gresham had also met another lady in London, namely Miss
Dunstable.  Mary would indeed have been grateful to Miss Dunstable,
could she have know all that lady did for her.  Frank's love was never
allowed to flag.  When he spoke of the difficulties in his way, she
twitted him by being overcome by straws; and told him that no one was
ever worth having who was afraid of every lion he met in his path. 
When he spoke of money, she bade him earn it; and always ended by
offering to smooth for him any real difficulty which want of means 
might put in his way.

'No,' Frank used to say to himself, when these offers were made, 'I
never intended to take her and her money together; and, therefore, I
certainly will never take the money alone.'

A day or two after Miss Oriel's visit, Mary received the following note
from Beatrice.

'DEAREST, DEAREST MARY, 

'I shall be so happy to see you, and will come to-morrow at
twelve. I have asked mamma, and she says that, for once, she
has no objection. You know it is not my fault that I have
never been with you; don't you? Frank comes home on the
twelfth. Mr Oriel wants the wedding to be on the first of
September; but that seems to be so very, very soon; doesn't
it? However, mamma and papa are all on his side. I won't write
about this, though, for we shall have such a delicious talk.
Oh, Mary! I have been so unhappy without you.
'Ever your own affectionate, 
TRICHY'

Though Mary was delighted at the idea of once more having her friend in
her arms, there was, nevertheless, something in the letter which
oppressed her. She could not put up with the idea that Beatrice should
have permission given to come to her--just for once. She hardly wished
to be seen by permission. Nevertheless, she did not refuse the proffered
visit, and the first sight of Beatrice's face, the first touch of the
first embrace, dissipated for the moment her anger.

And then Beatrice fully enjoyed the delicious talk which she had
promised herself. Mary let her have her way, and for two hours all the
delights and all the duties, all the comforts and all the
responsibilities of a parson's wife were discussed with almost equal
ardour on both sides. The duties and responsibilities were not exactly
those which too often fall to the lot of the mistress of an English
vicarage. Beatrice was not doomed to make her husband comfortable, to
educate her children, dress herself like a lady, and exercise
open-handed charity on an income of two hundred pounds a year. Her
duties and responsibilities would have to spread themselves over seven
or eight times that amount of worldly burden. Living also close to
Greshamsbury, and not far from Courcy Castle, she would have the full
advantage and all the privileges of county society. In fact, it was all
couleur de rose, and so she chatted deliciously with her friend.

But it was impossible that they should separate without something having
been said as to Mary's own lot. It would, perhaps, have been better that
they should do so; but this was hardly within the compass of human
nature.

'And Mary, you know, I shall be able to see you as often as I like;--you
and Dr Thorne, too, when I have a house of my own.'

Mary said nothing, but essayed to smile.  It was but a ghastly attempt.

'You know how happy that will make me,' continued Beatrice.  'Of course
mamma won't expect me to be led by her then; if he likes it, there can
be no objection; and he will like it, you may be sure of that.'

'You are very kind, Trichy,' said Mary; but she spoke in a tone very
different from that she would have used eighteen months ago.

'Why, what is the matter, Mary?  Shan't you be glad to come and see us?'

'I do not know, dearest; that must depend on circumstances.  To see you,
you yourself, your own dear, sweet, loving face must always be pleasant
to me.'

'And shan't you be glad to see him?'

'Yes, certainly, if he loves you.'

'Of course he loves me.'

'All that alone would be pleasant enough, Trichy.  But what if there
should be circumstances which should still make us enemies; should make
your friends and my friends--friend, I should say, for I have only
one--should make them opposed to each other?'

'Circumstances!  What circumstances?'

'You are going to be married, Trichy, to the man you love; are you not?'

'Indeed I am!'

'And it is not pleasant?  is it not a happy feeling?'

'Pleasant!  happy!  yes, very pleasant; very happy.  But, Mary, I am not
at all in such a hurry as he is,' said Beatrice, naturally thinking of
her own little affairs.

'And, suppose I should wish to be married to the man that I love?' Mary
said this slowly and gravely, and as she spoke she looked her friend
full in the face.

Beatrice was somewhat astonished, and for the moment hardly understood. 
'I am sure I hope you will some day.'

'No, Trichy; no, you hope the other way.  I love your brother; I love
Frank Gresham; I love him quite as well, quite as warmly, as you love
Caleb Oriel.'

'Do you?' said Beatrice, staring with all her eyes, and giving one long
sigh, as this new subject for sorrow was so distinctly put before her.

'It that so odd?' said Mary.  'You love Mr Oriel, though you have been
intimate with him hardly more than two years. Is it so odd that I should
love your brother, whom I have known almost all my life?'

'But, Mary, I thought it was always understood between us that--that--I
mean that you were not to care about him; not in the way of loving him,
you know--I thought you always said so--I have always told mamma so as
if it came from yourself.'

'Beatrice, do not tell anything to Lady Arabella as though it came from
me; I do not want anything to be told to her, either of me or from me.
Say what you like to me yourself; whatever you say will not anger me.
Indeed, I know what you would say--and yet I love you. Oh, I love you,
Trichy--Trichy, I do love you so much! Don't turn away from me!'

There was such a mixture in Mary's manner of tenderness and almost
ferocity, that poor Beatrice could hardly follow her. 'Turn away from
you, Mary! no never; but this does make me unhappy.'

'It is better that you should know it all, and then you will not be led
into fighting my battles again. You cannot fight them so that I should
win; I do love your brother; love him truly, fondly, tenderly. I would
wish to have him for my husband as you wish to have Mr Oriel.'

'But, Mary, you cannot marry him!'

'Why not?' said she, in a loud voice.  'Why can I not marry him?  If the
priest says a blessing over us, shall we not be married as well as you
and your husband?'

'But you know he cannot marry unless his wife shall have money.'

'Money--money; and he is to sell himself for money?  Oh, Trichy! do not
you talk about money. It is horrible. But, Trichy, I will grant it--I
cannot marry him; but still, I love him. He has a name, a place in the
world, and fortune, family, high blood, position, everything. He has all
this, and I have nothing. Of course I cannot marry him. But yet I do
love him.'

'Are you engaged to him, Mary?'

'He is not engaged to me; but I am to him.'

'Oh, Mary, that is impossible!'

'It is not impossible: it is the cast--I am pledged to him; but he is
not pledged to me.'

'But, Mary, don't look at me in that way.  I do not quite understand
you. What is the good of your being engaged if you cannot marry him?'

'Good!  there is no good.  But can I help it, if I love him? Can I make
myself not love him by just wishing it? Oh, I would do it if I could.
But now you will understand why I shake my head when you talk of coming
to your house. Your ways and my ways must be different.'

Beatrice was startled, and, for a time, silenced.  What Mary said of the
difference of their ways was quite true. Beatrice had dearly loved her
friend, and had thought of her with affection through all this long
period in which they had been separated; but she had given her love and
her thoughts on the understanding, as it were, that they were in unison
as to the impropriety of Frank's conduct.

She had always spoken, with a grave face, of Frank and his love as of a
great misfortune, even to Mary herself; and her pity for Mary had been
founded on the conviction of her innocence. Now all those ideas had to
be altered. Mary owned her fault, confessed herself to be guilty of all
that Lady Arabella so frequently laid to her charge, and confessed
herself anxious to commit every crime as to which Beatrice had been ever
so ready to defend her.

Had Beatrice up to this dreamed that Mary was in love with Frank, she
would doubtless have sympathized with her more or less sooner or later.
As it was, is was beyond all doubt that she would soon sympathize with
her. But, at the moment, the suddenness of the declaration seemed to
harden her heart, and she forgot, as it were, to speak tenderly to her
friend.

She was silent, therefore, and dismayed; and looked as though she
thought that her ways and Mary's ways must be different.

Mary saw all that was passing in the other's mind: no, not all; all the
hostility, the disappointment, the disapproval, the unhappiness, she did
see; but not the under-current of love, which was strong enough to well
up and drown all these, if only time could be allowed for it to do so.

'I am so glad to have told you,' said Mary, curbing herself, 'for deceit
and hypocrisy are detestable.'

'It was a misunderstanding, not deceit,' said Beatrice.

'Well, now we understand each other; now you know that I have a heart
within me, which like those of some others has not always been under my
own control. Lady Arabella believes that I am intriguing to be the
mistress of Greshamsbury. You, at any rate, will not think that of me.
If it could be discovered to-morrow that Frank were not the heir, I
might have some chance of happiness.'

'But, Mary--'

'Well?'

'You say you love him.'

'Yes; I do say so.'

'But if he does not love you, will you cease to do so?'

'If I have a fever, I will get rid of it if I can; in such a case I must
do so, or die.'

'I fear,' continued Beatrice, 'you hardly know, perhaps do not think,
what is Frank's real character. He is not made to settle down early in
life; even now, I believe he is attached to some lady in London, whom,
of course, he cannot marry.'

Beatrice had said this in perfect trueness of heart.  She had heard of
Frank's new love-affair, and believing what she had heard, thought it
best to tell the truth. But the information was not of a kind to quiet
Mary's spirit.

'Very well,' said she, 'let it be so.  I have nothing to say against
it.'

'But are you not preparing wretchedness and unhappiness for yourself?'

'Very likely.'

'Oh, Mary, do not be so cold with me!  you know how delighted I should
be to have you for a sister-in-law, if only it were possible.'

'Yes, Trichy; but it is impossible, is it not?  Impossible that Francis
Gresham of Greshamsbury should disgrace himself by marrying such a poor
creature as I am. Of course I know it; of course, I am prepared for
unhappiness and misery. He can amuse himself as he likes with me or
others--with anybody. It is his privilege. It is quite enough to say
that he is not made for settling down. I know my own position;--and yet
I love him.'

'But, Mary, has he asked you to be his wife?  If so--'

'You ask home-questions, Beatrice.  Let me ask you one; has he ever told
you that he has done so?'

At this moment Beatrice was not disposed to repeat all that Frank had
said. A year ago, before he went away, he had told his sister a score of
times that he meant to marry Mary Thorne if she would have him; but
Beatrice now looked on all that as idle, boyish vapouring. The pity was,
that Mary should have looked on it differently.

'We will each keep our secret,' said Mary.  'Only remember this: should
Frank marry to-morrow, I shall have no ground for blaming him. He is
free as far I as am concerned. He can take the London lady if he likes.
You may tell him so from me. But, Trichy, what else I have told you, I
have told you only.'

'Oh, yes!' said Beatrice, sadly; 'I shall say nothing of it to anybody. 
It is very sad, very, very; I was so happy when I came here, and now I
am so wretched.' This was the end of that delicious talk to which she
had looked forward with so much eagerness.

'Don't be wretched about me, dearest; I shall get through it. I
sometimes think I was born to be unhappy, and that unhappiness agrees
with me best. Kiss me now, Trichy, and don't be wretched any more. You
owe it to Mr Oriel to be as happy as the day is long.'

And then they parted.

Beatrice, as she went out, saw Dr Thorne in his little shop on the
right-hand side of the passage deeply engaged in some derogatory branch
of an apothecary's mechanical trade; mixing a dose, perhaps, for a
little child. She would have passed him without speaking, if she could
have been sure of doing so without notice, for her heart was full, and
her eyes were red with tears; but it was so long since she had been in
his house that she was more than ordinarily anxious not to appear
uncourteous or unkind to him.

'Good morning, doctor,' she said, changing her countenance as best she
might, and attempting a smile.

'Ah, my fairy!' said he, leaving his villainous compounds, and coming
out to her; 'and you, too, are about to become a steady old lady.'

'Indeed, I am not, doctor; I don't mean to be either steady or old, for
the next ten years. But who has told you? I suppose Mary has been a
traitor.'

'Well, I will confess Mary was the traitor.  But hadn't I a right to be
told, seeing how often I have brought you sugar-plums in my pocket? But
I wish you joy with all my heart--with all my heart. Oriel is an
excellent, good fellow.'

'Is he not, doctor?'

'An excellent, good fellow.  I never heard but of one fault that he
had.'

'What was that one fault, Doctor Thorne?'

'He thought that clergymen should not marry.  But you have cured that,
and now he's perfect.'

'Thank you, doctor.  I declare that you say the prettiest things of all
my friends.'

'And none of your friends wish prettier things for you.  I do
congratulate you, Beatrice, and hope you may be happy with the man you
have chosen;' and taking both her hands in his, he pressed them warmly,
and bade God bless her.

'Oh, doctor!  I do so hope the time will come when we shall all be
friends again.'

'I hope it as well, my dear.  But let it come, or let it not come, my
regard for you will be the same:' and then she parted from him also, and
went her way.

Nothing was spoken of that evening between Dr Thorne and his niece
excepting Beatrice's future happiness; nothing, at least, having
reference to what had passed that morning. But on the following morning,
circumstances led to Frank Gresham's name being mentioned.

At the usual breakfast-hour the doctor entered the parlour with a
harassed face. He had an open letter in his hand, and it was at once
clear to Mary that he was going to speak on some subject that vexed him.

'That unfortunate fellow is again in trouble.  Here is a letter from
Greyson.' Greyson was a London apothecary, who had been appointed as
medical attendant to Sir Louis Scatcherd, and whose real business
consisted in keeping a watch on the baronet, and reporting to Dr Thorne
when anything was very much amiss. 'Here is a letter from Greyson; he
has been drunk for the last three days, and is now laid up in a terribly
nervous state.'

'You won't go up to town again; will you, uncle?'

'I hardly know what to do.  No, I think not.  He talks of coming down
here to Greshamsbury.'

'Who, Sir Louis?'

'Yes, Sir Louis.  Greyson says that he will be down as soon as he can
get out of his room.'

'What!  to this house?'

'What other home can he come to?'

'Oh, uncle!  I hope not.  Pray, pray do not let him come here.'

'I cannot prevent it, dear.  I cannot shut my door on him.'

They sat down to breakfast, and Mary gave him his tea in silence.  'I am
going over to Boxall Hill before dinner,' said he. 'Have you any message
to send to Lady Scatcherd?'

'Message!  no, I have no message; not especially: give her my love, of
course,' she said listlessly. And then, as though a thought had suddenly
struck her, she spoke with more energy. 'But, couldn't I go to Boxall
Hill again? I should be so delighted.'

'What!  to run away from Sir Louis?  No, dearest, we will have no more
running away. He will probably also go to Boxall Hill, and he could
annoy you much more there than he can here.'

'But, uncle, Mr Gresham will be home on the twelfth,' she said,
blushing.

'What!  Frank?'

'Yes.  Beatrice said he was to be here on the twelfth.'

'And would you run away from him too, Mary?'

'I do not know: I do not know what to do.'

'No; we will have no more running away: I am sorry that you ever did so.
It was my fault, altogether my fault; but it was foolish.'

'Uncle, I am not happy here.'  As she said this, she put down the cup
which she had held, and, leaning her elbows on the table, rested her
forehead on her hands.

'And would you be happier at Boxall Hill?  It is not the place that
makes the happiness.'

'No, I know that; it is not the place.  I do not look to be happy in any
place; but I should be quieter, more tranquil elsewhere than here.'

'I also sometimes think that it would be better for us to take up our
staves and walk away from Greshamsbury;--leave it altogether, and settle
elsewhere; miles, miles, miles away from here. Should you like that,
dearest?'

Miles, miles, miles away from Greshamsbury!  There was something in the
sound that fell very cold on Mary's ears, unhappy as she was.
Greshamsbury had been so dear to her; in spite of all that had passed,
was still so dear to her! Was she prepared to take up her staff, as her
uncle said, and walk forth from the place with the full understanding
that she was to return to it no more; with a mind resolved that there
should be an inseparable gulf between her and its inhabitants? Such she
knew was the proposed nature of the walking away of which her uncle
spoke. So she sat there, resting on her arms, and gave no answer to the
question that had been put to her.

'No, we will stay here a while yet,' said her uncle.  'It may come to
that, but this is not the time. For one season longer let us face--I
will not say our enemies; I cannot call anybody my enemy who bears the
name of Gresham.' And then he went on for a moment with his breakfast.
'So Frank will be here on the twelfth?'

'Yes, uncle.'

'Well, dearest, I have no questions to ask you; no directions to give. I
know how good you are, and how prudent; I am anxious only for your
happiness; not at all--'

'Happiness, uncle, is out of the question.'

'I hope not.  It is never out of the question, never can be out of the
question. But, as I was saying, I am quite satisfied your conduct will
be good, and, therefore, I have no questions to ask. We will remain
here; and, whether good or evil come, we will not be ashamed to show our
faces.'

She sat for a while again silent; collecting her courage on the subject
that was nearest her heart. She would have given the world that he
should ask her questions; but she could not bid him to do so; and she
found it impossible to talk openly to him about Frank unless he did so.
'Will he come here?' at last she said, in a low-toned voice.

'Who?  He, Louis?  Yes, I think that in all probability he will.'

'No; but Frank,' she said, in a still lower voice.

'Ah!  my darling, that I cannot tell; but will it be well that he should
come here?'

'I do not know,' she said.  'No, I suppose not.  But, uncle, I don't
think he will come.'

She was now sitting on a sofa, away from the table, and he got up sat
down beside her, and took her hands in his. 'Mary,' said he, 'you must
be strong now; strong to endure, not to attack. I think that you have
that strength; but, if not, perhaps it will be better that we should go
away.'

'I will be strong,' said she, rising up and going towards the door.
'Never mind me, uncle; don't follow me; I will be strong. It will be
base, cowardly, mean to run away; very base in me to make you do so.'

'No, dearest, not so; it will be the same to me.'

'No,' said she, 'I will not run away from Lady Arabella.  And, as for
him--if he loves this other one, he shall hear no reproach from me.
Uncle, I will be strong;' and running back to him, she threw her arms
around him and kissed him. And, still restraining her tears, she got
safely to her bedroom. In what way she may there have shown her
strength, it would not be well for us to inquire.



CHAPTER XXXIV

A BAROUCHE AND FOUR ARRIVES AT GRESHAMSBURY

During the last twelve months Sir Louis Scatcherd had been very
efficacious in bringing trouble, turmoil, and vexation upon
Greshamsbury. Now that it was too late to take steps to save himself, Dr
Thorne found that the will left by Sir Roger was so made as to entail
upon him duties that he would find it almost impossible to perform. Sir
Louis, though his father had wished to make him still a child in the eye
of the law, was no child. He knew his own rights and was determined to
exact them; and before Sir Roger had been dead three months, the doctor
found himself in continual litigation with a low Barchester attorney,
who was acting on behalf of his, the doctor's, own ward.

And if the doctor suffered so did the squire, and so did those who had
hitherto had the management of the squire's affairs. Dr Thorne soon
perceived that he was to be driven into litigation, not only with Mr
Finnie, the Barchester attorney, but with the squire himself. While
Finnie harassed him, he was compelled to harass Mr Gresham. He was no
lawyer himself; and though he had been able to manage very well between
the squire and Sir Roger, and had perhaps given himself some credit for
his lawyer-like ability in so doing, he was utterly unable to manage
between Sir Louis and Mr Gresham.

He had, therefore, to employ a lawyer on his own account, and it seemed
probable that the whole amount of Sir Roger's legacy to himself would by
degrees be expended in this manner. And then the squire's lawyers had to
take up the matter; and they did so greatly to the detriment of poor Mr
Yates Umbleby, who was found to have made a mess of the affairs
entrusted to him. Mr Umbleby's accounts were incorrect; his mind was
anything but clear, and he confessed, when put to it by the very sharp
gentleman that came down from London, that he was 'bothered'; and so,
after a while, he was suspended from his duties, and Mr Gazebee, the
sharp gentleman from London, reigned over the diminished rent-roll of
the Greshamsbury estate.

Thus everything was going wrong at Greshamsbury--with the one exception
of Mr Oriel and his love-suit. Miss Gushing attributed the deposition of
Mr Umbleby to the narrowness of the victory which Beatrice had won in
carrying off Mr Oriel. For Miss Gushing was a relation of the Umblebys,
and had been for many years one of their family. 'If she had only chosen
to exert herself as Miss Gresham had done, she could have had Mr Oriel,
easily; oh, too easily! but she had despised such work,' so she said.
'But though she had despised it, the Greshams had not been less
irritated, and, therefore, Mr Umbleby had been driven out of his house.'
We can hardly believe this, as victory generally makes men generous.
Miss Gushing, however, stated it as a fact so often that it is probable
she was induced to believe it herself.

Thus everything was going wrong at Greshamsbury, and the squire himself
was especially a sufferer. Umbleby had at any rate been his own man, and
he could do what he liked with him. He could see him when he liked, and
where he liked, and now he liked; could scold him if in an ill-humour,
and laugh at him when in a good humour. All this Mr Umbleby knew, and
bore. But Mr Gazebee was a very different sort of gentleman; he was the
junior partner in the firm of Gumption, Gazebee & Gazebee of Mount
Street, a house that never defiled itself with any other business than
the agency business, and that in the very highest line. They drew out
leases, and managed property both for the Duke of Omnium and Lord De
Courcy; and ever since her marriage, it had been one of the objects
dearest to Lady Arabella's heart that the Greshamsbury acres should be
superintended by the polite skill and polished legal ability of that all
but elegant firm in Mount Street.

The squire had long stood firm, and had delighted in having everything
done under his own eye by poor Mr Yates Umbleby. But now, alas! he could
stand it no longer. He had put off the evil day as long as he could; he
had deferred the odious work of investigation till things had seemed
resolved on investigating themselves; and then, when it was absolutely
necessary that Mr Umbleby should go, there was nothing for him left but
to fall into the ready hands of Messrs Gumption, Gazebee and Gazebee.

It must not be supposed that Messrs Gumption, Gazebee and Gazebee were
in the least like the ordinary run of attorneys. They wrote no letters
for six-and-eightpence each: they collected no debts, filed no bills,
made no charge per folio for 'whereases' and 'as aforesaids'; they did
no dirty work, and probably were as ignorant of the interior of a court
of law as any young lady living in their Mayfair vicinity. No; their
business was to manage the property of great people, draw up leases,
make legal assignments, get the family marriage settlements made, and
look after wills. Occasionally, also, they had to raise money; but it
was generally understood that this was done by proxy.

The firm had been going on for a hundred and fifty years, and the
designation had often been altered; but it always consisted of Gumptions
and Gazebees differently arranged, and no less hallowed names had ever
been permitted to appear. It had been Gazebee, Gazebee and Gumption;
then Gazebee and Gumption; then Gazebee, Gumption and Gumption; then
Gumption, Gumption and Gazebee; and now it was Gumption, Gazebee and
Gazebee.

Mr Gazebee, the junior member of this firm, was a very elegant young
man. While looking at him riding in Rotten Row, you would hardly have
taken him for an attorney; and had he heard that you had so taken him,
he would have been very much surprised indeed. He was rather bald; not
being, as people say, quite so young as he was once. His exact age was
thirty-eight. But he had a really remarkable pair of jet-black whiskers,
which fully made up for his deficiency as to his head; he had also dark
eyes, and a beaked nose, what may be called a distinguished mouth, and
was always dressed in fashionable attire. The fact was, that Mr Mortimer
Gazebee, junior partner in the firm Gumption, Gazebee, and Gazebee, by
no means considered himself to be made of that very disagreeable
material which mortals call small beer.

When this great firm was applied to get Mr Gresham through his
difficulties, and when the state of his affairs was made known to them,
they at first expressed rather a disinclination for the work. But at
last, moved doubtless by their respect for the De Courcy interest, they
assented; and Mr Gazebee, junior, went down to Greshamsbury. The poor
squire passed many a sad day after that before he again felt himself to
be master even of his own domain.

Nevertheless, when Mr Mortimer Gazebee visited Greshamsbury, which he
did on more than one or two occasions, he was always received en grand
seigneur. To Lady Arabella he was by no means an unwelcome guest, for
she found herself able, for the first time in her life, to speak
confidentially on her husband's pecuniary affairs with the man who had
the management of her husband's property. Mr Gazebee also was a pet with
Lady De Courcy; and being known to be a fashionable man in London, and
quite a different sort of person from poor Mr Umbleby, he was always
received with smiles. He had a hundred little ways of making himself
agreeable, and Augusta declared to her cousin, the Lady Amelia, after
having been acquainted with him for a few months, that he would be a
perfect gentleman, only, that his family had never been anything but
attorneys. The Lady Amelia smiled in her own peculiarly aristocratic
way, shrugged her shoulders slightly, and said, 'that Mr Mortimer
Gazebee was a very good sort of person, very.' Poor Augusta felt herself
snubbed, thinking perhaps of the tailor's son; but as there was never
any appeal against the Lady Amelia, she said nothing more at that moment
in favour of Mr Mortimer Gazebee.

All these evils--Mr Mortimer Gazebee being the worst of them--had Sir
Louis Scatcherd brought down on the poor squire's head. There may be
those who will say that the squire had brought them on himself, by
running into debt; and so, doubtless, he had; but it was not the less
true that the baronet's interference was unnecessary, vexatious, and one
might almost say, malicious. His interest would have been quite safe in
the doctor's hands, and he had, in fact, no legal right to meddle; but
neither the doctor nor the squire could prevent him. Mr Finnie knew very
well what he was about, if Sir Louis did not; and so the three went on,
each with his own lawyer, and each of them distrustful, unhappy, and ill
at ease. This was hard upon the doctor, for he was not in debt, and had
borrowed no money.

There was not much reason to suppose that the visit of Sir Louis to
Greshamsbury would much improve matters. It must be presumed that he was
not coming with any amicable views, but with the object rather of
looking after his own; a phrase which was now constantly in his mouth.
He might probably find it necessary while looking after his own at
Greshamsbury, to say some very disagreeable things to the squire; and
the doctor, therefore, hardly expected that the visit would go off
pleasantly.

When last he saw Sir Louis, now nearly twelve months since, he was
intent on making a proposal of marriage to Miss Thorne. This intention
he carried out about two days after Frank Gresham had done the same
thing. He had delayed doing so till he had succeeded in purchasing his
friend Jenkins's Arab pony, imagining that such a present could not but
go far in weaning Mary's heart from her other lover. Poor Mary was put
to the trouble of refusing both the baronet and the pony, and a very bad
time she had of it while doing so. Sir Louis was a man easily angered,
and not very easily pacified, and Mary had to endure a good deal of
annoyance; from any other person, indeed, she would have called it
impertinence. Sir Louis, however, had to bear his rejection as best he
could, and, after a perseverance of three days, returned to London in
disgust; and Mary had not seen him since.

Mr Greyson's first letter was followed by a second; and the second was
followed by the baronet in person. He also required to be received en
grand seigneur, perhaps more imperatively than Mr Mortimer Gazebee
himself. He came with four posters from the Barchester Station, and had
himself rattled up to the doctor's door in a way that took the breath
away from all Greshamsbury. Why! the squire himself for a many long year
had been contented to come home with a pair of horses; and four were
never seen in the place, except when the De Courcys came to
Greshamsbury, or Lady Arabella, with all her daughters returned from her
hard-fought metropolitan campaigns.

Sir Louis, however, came with four, and very arrogant looked, leaning
back in the barouche belonging to the George and Dragon, and wrapped up
in fur, although it was now midsummer. And up in the dicky behind was a
servant, more arrogant, if possible, than his master--the baronet's own
man, who was the object of Dr Thorne's special detestation and disgust.
He was a little fellow, chosen originally on account of his light weight
on horseback; but if that may be considered a merit, it was the only one
he had. His out-door show dress was a little tight frock-coat, round
which a polished strap was always buckled tightly, a stiff white choker,
leather breeches, top-boots, and a hat, with a cockade, stuck on one
side of his head. His name was Jonah, which his master and his master's
friends shortened to Joe; none, however, but those who were very
intimate with his master were allowed to do so with impunity.

This Joe was Dr Thorne's special aversion.  In his anxiety to take every
possible step to keep Sir Louis from poisoning himself, he had at first
attempted to enlist the baronet's 'own man' in the cause. Joe had
promised fairly, but had betrayed the doctor at once, and had become the
worst instrument of his master's dissipation. When, therefore, his hat
and the cockade were seen, as the carriage dashed up to the door, the
doctor's contentment was by no means increased.

Sir Louis was now twenty-three years old, and was a great deal too
knowing to allow himself to be kept under the doctor's thumb. It had,
indeed, become his plan to rebel against his guardian in almost
everything. He had at first been decently submissive, with the view of
obtaining increased supplies of ready money; but he had been sharp
enough to perceive that, let his conduct be what it would, the doctor
would keep him out of debt; but that the doing so took so large a sum
that he could not hope for any further advances. In this respect Sir
Louis was perhaps more keen-witted than Dr Thorne.

Mary, when she saw the carriage, at once ran up to her own bedroom. The
doctor, who had been with her in the drawing-room, went down to meet his
ward, but as soon as he saw the cockade he darted almost involuntarily
into his shop and shut the door. This protection, however, lasted only
for a moment; he felt that decency required him to meet his guest, and
so he went forth and faced the enemy.

'I say,' said Joe, speaking to Janet, who stood curtsying at the gate,
with Bridget, the other maid, behind her, 'I say, are there any chaps
about the place to take the things--eh? come, look sharp here.'

It so happened that the doctor's groom was not on the spot, and 'other
chaps' the doctor had none.

'Take those things, Bridget,' he said, coming forward and offering his
hand to the baronet. Sir Louis, when he saw his host, roused himself
slowly from the back of his carriage. 'How do, doctor?' said he. 'What
terrible bad roads you have here! and, upon my word, it's as cold as
winter:' and, so saying, he slowly proceeded to descend.

Sir Louis was a year older than when we last saw him, and, in his
generation, a year wiser. He had then been somewhat humble before the
doctor; but now he was determined to let his guardian see that he knew
how to act the baronet; that he had acquired the manners of a great man;
and that he was not to be put upon. He had learnt some lessons from
Jenkins in London, and other friends of the same sort, and he was about
to profit by them.

The doctor showed him to his room, and then proceeded to ask after his
health. 'Oh, I'm right enough,' said Sir Louis. 'You mustn't believe all
that fellow Greyson tells you: he wants me to take salts and senna,
opodeldoc, and all that sort of stuff; looks after his bill, you
know--eh? like all the rest of you. But I won't have it;--not at any
price; and then he writes to you.'

'I'm glad to see you are able to travel,' said Dr Thorne, who could not
force himself to tell his guest that he was glad to see him at
Greshamsbury.

'Oh, travel; yes, I can travel well enough.  But I wish you had some
better sort of trap down in these country parts. I'm shaken to bits.
And, doctor, would you tell your people to send that fellow of mine up
here with hot water.

So dismissed, the doctor went his way, and met Joe swaggering in one of
the passages, while Janet and her colleague dragged along between them a
heavy article of baggage.

'Janet,' said he, 'go downstairs and get Sir Louis some hot water, and
Joe, do you take hold of your master's portmanteau.'

Joe sulkily did as he was bid.  'Seems to me,' said he, turning to the
girl, and speaking before the doctor was out of hearing, 'seems to me,
my dear, you be rather short-handed here; lots of work and nothing to
get; that's about the ticket, ain't it?' Bridget was too demurely modest
to make any answer upon so short an acquaintance; so, putting her end of
the burden down at the strange gentleman's door, she retreated into the
kitchen.

Sir Louis in answer to the doctor's inquiries, had declared himself to
be all right; but his appearance was anything but all right. Twelve
months since, a life of dissipation, or rather, perhaps, a life of
drinking, had not had upon him so strong an effect but that some of the
salt of youth was still left; some of the freshness of young years might
still be seen in his face. But this was now all gone; his eyes were
sunken and watery, his cheeks were hollow and wan, his mouth was drawn
and his lips dry; his back was even bent, and his legs were unsteady
under him, so that he had been forced to step down from his carriage as
an old man would do. Alas, alas! he had no further chance now of ever
being all right again.

Mary had secluded herself in her bedroom as soon as the carriage had
driven up to the door, and there she remained till dinner-time. But she
could not shut herself up altogether. It would be necessary that she
should appear at dinner; and, therefore, a few minutes before the hour,
she crept out into the drawing-room. As she opened the door, she looked
in timidly, expecting Sir Louis to be there; but when she saw that her
uncle was the only occupant of the room, her brow cleared, and she
entered with a quick step.

'He'll come down to dinner; won't he, uncle?'

'Oh, I suppose so.'

'What's he doing now?'

'Dressing, I suppose; he's been at this hour.'

'But, uncle--'

'Well?'

'Will he come up after dinner, do you think?'

Mary spoke of him as though he were some wild beast, whom her uncle
insisted on having in his house.

'Goodness knows what he will do!  Come up?  Yes.  He will not stay in
the dining-room all night.'

'But, dear uncle, do be serious.'

'Serious!'

'Yes; serious.  Don't you think that I might go to bed, instead of
waiting?'

The doctor was saved the trouble of answering by the entrance of the
baronet. He was dressed in what he considered the most fashionable style
of the day. He had on a new dress-coat lined with satin, new
dress-trousers, a silk waistcoat covered with chains, a white cravat,
polished pumps, and silk stockings, and he carried a scented
handkerchief in his hand; he had rings on his fingers, and carbuncle
studs in his shirt, and he smelt as sweet as patchouli could make him.
But he could hardly do more than shuffle into the room, and seemed
almost to drag one of his legs behind him.

Mary, in spite of her aversion, was shocked and distressed when she saw
him. He, however, seemed to think himself perfect, and was no whit
abashed by the unfavourable reception which twelve months since had been
paid to his suit. Mary came up and shook hands with him, and he received
her with a compliment which no doubt he thought must be acceptable.
'Upon my word, Miss Thorne, every place seems to agree with you; one
better than another. You were looking charming at Boxall Hill; but, upon
my word, charming isn't half strong enough now.'

Mary sat down quietly, and the doctor assumed a face of unutterable
disgust. This was the creature for whom all his sympathies had been
demanded, all his best energies put in requisition; on whose behalf he
was to quarrel with his oldest friends, lose his peace and quietness of
life, and exercise all the functions of a loving friend! This was his
self-invited guest, whom he was bound to foster, and whom he could not
turn from his door.

The dinner came, and Mary had to put her hand upon his arm.  She
certainly did not lean upon him, and once or twice felt inclined to give
him some support. They reached the dining-room, however, the doctor
following them, and then sat down, Janet waiting in the room, as was
usual.

'I say, doctor,' said the baronet, 'hadn't my man better come in and
help? He's got nothing to do, you know. We should be more cosy,
shouldn't we?'

'Janet will manage pretty well,' said the doctor.

'Oh, you'd better have Joe; there's nothing like a good servant at
table. I say, Janet, just send that fellow in, will you?'

'We shall do very well without him,' said the doctor, becoming rather
red about the cheek-bones, and with a slight gleam of determination
about the eye. Janet, who saw how matters stood, made no attempt to obey
the baronet's order.

'Oh, nonsense, doctor; you think he's an uppish sort of fellow, I know,
and you don't like to trouble him; but when I'm near him, he's all
right; just send him in, will you?'

'Sir Louis,' said the doctor, 'I'm accustomed to none but my own old
woman here in my own house, and if you will allow me, I'll keep my old
ways. I shall be sorry if you are not comfortable.' The baronet said
nothing more, and the dinner passed off slowly and wearily enough.

When Mary had eaten her fruit and escaped, the doctor got into one
arm-chair and the baronet into another, and the latter began the only
work of existence of which he knew anything.

'That's good port,' said he; 'very fair port.'

The doctor loved his port wine, and thawed a little in his manner.  He
loved it not as a toper, but as a collector loves his pet pictures. He
liked to talk about it, and think about it; to praise it, and hear it
praised; to look at it turned towards the light, and to count over the
years it had lain in his cellar.

'Yes,' said he, 'it's pretty fair wine.  It was, at least, when I got
it, twenty years ago, and I don't suppose time has hurt it;' and he held
the glass up to the window, and looked at the evening light through the
rosy tint of the liquid. 'Ah, dear, there's not much of it left; more's
the pity.'

'A good thing won't last for ever.  I'll tell you what now; I wish I had
brought down a dozen or two of claret. I've some prime stuff in London;
got it from Muzzle and Drug, at ninety-six shillings; it was a great
favour, though. I'll tell you what now, I'll send up for a couple of
dozen to-morrow. I mustn't drink you out of the house, high and dry;
must I, doctor?'

The doctor froze immediately.

'I don't think I need trouble you,' said he; 'I never drink claret, at
least not here; and there's enough of the old bin left to last some
little time longer yet.'

Sir Louis drank two or three glasses of wine very quickly after each
other, and they immediately began to tell upon his weak stomach. But
before he was tipsy, he became more impudent and more disagreeable.

'Doctor,' said he, 'when are we going to see any of this Greshamsbury
money? That's what I want to know.'

'Your money is quite safe, Sir Louis; and the interest is paid to the
day.'

'Interest yes; but how do I know how long it will be paid?  I should
like to see the principal. A hundred thousand pounds, or something like
it, is a precious large stake to have in one man's hands, and he is
preciously hard up himself. I'll tell you what, doctor--I shall look the
squire up myself.'

'Look him up?'

'Yes; look him up; ferret him out; tell him a bit of my mind. I'll thank
you to pass the bottle. D--- me doctor; I mean to know how things are
going on.'

'Your money is quite safe,' repeated the doctor, 'and, to my mind, could
not be better invested.'

'That's all very well; d--- well I dare say, for you and Squire
Gresham--'

'What do you mean, Sir Louis?'

'Mean!  why I mean that I'll sell the squire up; that's what I
mean--hallo--beg pardon. I'm blessed if I haven't broken the water-jug.
That comes of having water on the table. Oh, d---- me, it's all over
me.' And then, getting up, to avoid the flood he himself had caused, he
nearly fell into the doctor's arms.

'You're tired with your journey, Sir Louis; perhaps you'd better go to
bed.'

'Well, I am a bit seedy or so.  Those cursed roads of yours shake a
fellow so.'

The doctor rang the bell, and, on this occasion, did request that Joe
might be sent for. Joe came in, and, though he was much steadier than
his master, looked as though he also had found some bin of which he had
approved.

'Sir Louis wishes to go to bed,' said the doctor; 'you had better give
him your arm.'

'Oh, yes; in course I will,' said Joe, standing immoveable about
half-way between the door and the table.

'I'll just take one more glass of the old port--eh, doctor?' said Sir
Louis, putting out his hand and clutching the decanter.

It is very hard for any man to deny his guest in his own house, and the
doctor, at the moment, did not know how to do it; so Sir Louis got his
wine, after pouring half of it over the table.

'Come in, sir, and give Sir Louis your arm,' said the doctor, angrily.

'So I will in course, if my master tells me; but, if you please, Dr
Thorne--' and Joe put his hand up to his hair in a manner that a great
deal more impudence than reverence in it--'I just want to ax one
question; where be I to sleep?'

Now this was a question which the doctor was not prepared to answer on
the spur of the moment, however well Janet or Mary might have been able
to do so.

'Sleep,' said he, 'I don't know where you are to sleep, and don't care;
ask Janet.'

'That's all very well, master--'

'Hold your tongue, sirrah!' said Sir Louis.  'What the devil do you want
of sleep?--come here,' and then, with his servant's help, he made his
way up to his bedroom, and was no more heard of that night.

'Did he get tipsy,' asked Mary, almost in a whisper, when her uncle
joined her in the drawing-room.

'Don't talk of it,' said he.  'Poor wretch!  poor wretch!  Let's have
some tea now, Molly, and pray don't talk any more about him to-night.'
Then Mary did make the tea, and did not talk any more about Sir Louis
that night.

What on earth were they to do with him?  He had come there self-invited;
but his connexion with the doctor was such, that it was impossible he
should be told to go away, either he himself, or that servant of his.
There was no reason to disbelieve him when he declared that he had come
down to ferret out the squire. Such was, doubtless, his intention. He
would ferret out the squire. Perhaps he might ferret out Lady Arabella
also. Frank would be home in a few days; and he, too, might be ferreted
out.

But the matter took a very singular turn, and one quite unexpected on
the doctor's part. On the morning following the little dinner of which
we have spoken, one of the Greshamsbury grooms rode up to the doctor's
door with two notes. One was addressed to the doctor in the squire's
well-known large handwriting, and the other was for Sir Louis. Each
contained an invitation do dinner for the following day; and that to the
doctor was in this wise:-

'DEAR DOCTOR,

Do come and dine here to-morrow, and bring Sir Louis Scatcherd with you.
If you're the man I take you to be, you won't refuse me. Lady Arabella
sends a note for Sir Louis. There will be nobody here but Oriel, and Mr
Gazebee, who's staying in the house.

'Yours ever, F.N.GRESHAM'

'PS--I make a positive request that you'll come, and I think you will
hardly refuse me.'

The doctor read it twice before he could believe it, and then ordered
Janet to take the other note up to Sir Louis. As these invitations were
rather in opposition to the then existing Greshamsbury tactics, the
cause of Lady Arabella's special civility must be explained.

Mr Mortimer Gazebee was now at the house, and therefore, it must be
presumed, that things were not allowed to go on after their old fashion.
Mr Gazebee was an acute as well as fashionable man; one who knew what he
was about, and who, moreover, had determined to give his very best
efforts on behalf of the Greshamsbury property. His energy, in this
respect, will explain itself hereafter. It was not probable that the
arrival in the village of such a person as Sir Louis Scatcherd should
escape attention. He had heard of it before dinner, and, before the
evening was over, had discussed it with Lady Arabella.

Her ladyship was not at first inclined to make much of Sir Louis, and
expressed herself as but little inclined to agree with Mr Gazebee when
that gentleman suggested that he should be treated with civility at
Greshamsbury. But she was at last talked over. She found it pleasant
enough to have more to do with the secret management of the estate than
Mr Gresham himself; and when Mr Gazebee proved to her, by sundry nods
and winks, and subtle allusions to her own infinite good sense, that it
was necessary to catch this obscene bird which had come to prey upon the
estate, by throwing a little salt upon his tail, she also nodded and
winked, and directed Augusta to prepare the salt according to order.

'But won't it be odd, Mr Gazebee, asking him out of Dr Thorne's house?'

'Oh, we must have the doctor, too, Lady Arabella; by all means ask the
doctor also.'

Lady Arabella's brow grew dark.  'Mr Gazebee,' she said, 'you can hardly
believe how that man has behaved to me.'

'He is altogether beneath your anger,' said Mr Gazebee, with a bow.

'I don't know: in one way he may be, but not in another.  I really do
not think I can sit down to table with Doctor Thorne.'

But, nevertheless, Mr Gazebee gained his point.  It was now about a week
since Sir Omicron Pie had been at Greshamsbury, and the squire had,
almost daily, spoken to his wife as to that learned man's advice. Lady
Arabella always answered in the same tone: 'You can hardly know, Mr
Gresham, how that man has insulted me.' But, nevertheless, the
physician's advice had not been disbelieved: it tallied too well with
her own inward convictions. She was anxious enough to have Doctor Thorne
back at her bedside, if she could only get him there without damage to
her pride. Her husband, she thought, might probably send the doctor
there without absolute permission from herself; in which case she would
have been able to scold, and show that she was offended; and, at the
same time, profit by what had been done. But Mr Gresham never thought of
taking so violent a step as this, and, therefore, Dr Fillgrave still
came, and her ladyship's finesse was wasted in vain.

But Mr Gazebee's proposition opened a door by which her point might be
gained. 'Well,' said she, at last, with infinite self-denial, 'if you
think it is for Mr Gresham's advantage, and if he chooses to ask Dr
Thorne, I will not refuse to receive him.'

Mr Gazebee's next task was to discuss the matter with the squire.  Nor
was this easy, for Mr Gazebee was no favourite with Mr Gresham. But the
task was at last performed successfully. Mr Gresham was so glad at heart
to find himself able, once more, to ask his old friend to his own house;
and, though it would have pleased him better that this sign of relenting
on his wife's part should have reached him by other means, he did not
refuse to take advantage of it; and so he wrote the above letter to Dr
Thorne.

The doctor, as we have said, read it twice; and he at once resolved
stoutly that he would not go.

'Oh, do, do, do go!' said Mary.  She well knew how wretched this feud
had made her uncle. 'Pray, pray go!'

'Indeed, I will not,' said he. 