 'There are some things a man should
bear, and some he should not.'

'You must go,' said Mary, who had taken the note from her uncle's hand,
and read it. 'You cannot refuse him when he asks you like that.'

'It will greatly grieve me; but I must refuse him.'

'I also am angry, uncle; very angry with Lady Arabella; but for him, for
the squire, I would go to him on my knees if he asked me in that way.'

'Yes; and had he asked you, I also would have gone.'

'Oh!  now I shall be so wretched.  It is his invitation, not hers: Mr
Gresham could not ask me. As for her, do not think of her; but do, do go
when he asks you like that. You will make me so miserable if you do not.
And then Sir Louis cannot go without you,'--and Mary pointed
upstairs--'and you may be sure that he will go.'

'Yes; and make a beast of himself.'

This colloquy was cut short by a message praying the doctor to go up to
Sir Louis's room. The young man was sitting in his dressing-gown,
drinking a cup of coffee at his toilet-table, while Joe was preparing
his razor and hot water. The doctor's nose immediately told him that
there was more in the coffee-cup than had come out of his own kitchen,
and he would not let the offence pass unnoticed.

'Are you taking brandy this morning, Sir Louis?'

'Just a little chasse-cafe,' said he, not exactly understanding the word
he used. 'It's all the go now; and a capital thing for the stomach.'

'It's not a capital thing for your stomach;--about the least capital
thing you can take; that is, if you wish to live.'

'Never mind about that now, doctor, but look here.  This is what we call
the civil thing--eh?' and he showed the Greshamsbury note. 'Not but that
they have an object, of course. I understand all that. Lots of girls
there--eh?'

The doctor took the note and read it.  'It is civil,' said he; 'very
civil.'

'Well; I shall go, of course.  I don't bear malice because he can't pay
me the money he owes me. I'll eat his dinner, and look at the girls.
Have you an invite too, doctor?'

'Yes; I have.'

'And you'll go?'

'I think not; but that need not deter you.  But, Sir Louis--'

'Well!  eh!  what is it?'

'Step downstairs a moment,' said the doctor, turning to the servant,
'and wait till you are called for. I wish to speak to your master.' Joe,
for a moment, looked up at the baronet's face, as though he wanted but
the slightest encouragement to disobey the doctor's orders; but not
seeing it, he slowly retired, and placed himself, of course, at the
keyhole.

And then, the doctor began a long and very useless lecture.  The first
object of it was to induce his ward not to get drunk at Greshamsbury;
but having got so far, he went on, and did succeed in frightening his
unhappy guest. Sir Louis did not possess the iron nerves of his
father--nerves which even brandy had not been able to subdue. The doctor
spoke, strongly, very strongly; spoke of quick, almost immediate death
in case of further excesses; spoke to him of the certainty there would
be that he could not live to dispose of his own property if he could not
refrain. And thus he did frighten Sir Louis. The father he had never
been able to frighten. But there are men who, though they fear death
hugely, fear present suffering more; who, indeed, will not bear a moment
of pain if there by any mode of escape. Sir Louis was such: he had no
strength of nerve, no courage, no ability to make a resolution and keep
it. He promised the doctor that he would refrain; and, as he did so, he
swallowed down his cup of coffee and brandy, in which the two articles
bore about equal proportions.

The doctor did, at last, make up his mind to go.  Whichever way he
determined, he found that he was not contented with himself. He did not
like to trust Sir Louis by himself, and he did not like to show that he
was angry. Still less did he like the idea of breaking bread in Lady
Arabella's house till some amends had been made to Mary. But his heart
would not allow him to refuse the petition contained in the squire's
postscript, and the matter ended in his accepting the invitation.

This visit of his ward's was, in every way, pernicious to the doctor. He
could not go about his business, fearing to leave such a man alone with
Mary. On the afternoon of the second day, she escaped to the parsonage
for an hour or so, and then, walked away among the lanes, calling on
some of her old friends among the farmers' wives. But even then, the
doctor was afraid to leave Sir Louis. What could such a man do, left
alone in a village like Greshamsbury? So he stayed at home, and the two
together went over their accounts. The baronet was particular about his
accounts, and said a good deal as to having Finnie over to Greshamsbury.
To this, however, Dr Thorne positively refused his consent.

The evening passed off better than the preceding one; at least the early
part of it. Sir Louis did not get tipsy; he came up to tea, and Mary,
who did not feel so keenly on the subject as her uncle, almost wished
that he had done so. At ten o'clock he went to bed.

But after that new troubles came on.  The doctor had gone downstairs
into his study to make up some of the time which he had lost, and had
just seated himself at his desk, when Janet, without announcing herself,
burst into the room; and Bridget, dissolved in hysterical tears, with
her apron to her eyes, appeared behind the senior domestic.

'Please, sir,' said Janet, driven by excitement much beyond her usual
place of speaking, and becoming unintentionally a little less respectful
than usual, 'please sir, that 'ere young man must go out of this here
house; or else no respectable young 'ooman can't stop here; no, indeed,
sir; and we be sorry to trouble you, Dr Thorne; so we be.'

'What young man?  Sir Louis?' asked the doctor.

'Man!' sobbed Bridget from behind.  'He an't no man, no nothing like a
man. If Tummas had been here, he wouldn't have dared; so he wouldn't.'
Thomas was the groom, and, if all Greshamsbury reports were true, it was
probable, that on some happy, future day, Thomas and Bridget would
become one flesh and one bone.

'Please sir,' continued Janet, 'there'll be bad work here if there 'ere
young man doesn't quit this here house this very night, and I'm sorry to
trouble you, doctor; and so I am. But Tom, he be given to fight a'most
for nothin'. He's out now; but if that there young man be's here when
Tom comes home, Tom will be punching his head; I know he will.'

'He wouldn't stand by and see a poor girl put upon; no more he
wouldn't,' said Bridget, through her tears.

After many futile inquiries, the doctor ascertained that Mr Jonah had
expressed some admiration for Bridget's youthful charms, and had, in the
absence of Janet, thrown himself at the lady's feet in a manner which
had not been altogether pleasing to her. She had defended herself
stoutly and loudly, and in the middle of the row Janet had come down.

'And where is he now?' said the doctor.

'Why, sir,' said Janet, 'the poor girl was so put about that she did
give him one touch across the face with the rolling-pin, and he be all
bloody now, in the back kitchen.' At hearing this achievement of hers
thus spoken of, Bridget sobbed more hysterically than ever; but the
doctor, looking at her arm as she held her apron to her face, thought in
his heart that Joe must have had so much the worst of it, that there
could be no possible need for the interference of Thomas the groom.

And such turned out to be the case.  The bridge of Joe's nose was
broken; and the doctor had to set it for him in a little bedroom at the
village public-house, Bridget having positively refused to go to bed in
the same house with so dreadful a character.

'Quiet now, or I'll be serving thee the same way; thee see I've found
the trick of it.' The doctor could not but hear so much as he made into
his own house by the back door, after finishing his surgical operation.
Bridget was recounting to her champion the fracas that had occurred; and
he, as was so natural, was expressing his admiration for her valour.



CHAPTER XXXV

SIR LOUIS GOES OUT TO DINNER

The next day Joe did not make his appearance, and Sir Louis with many
execrations, was driven to the terrible necessity of dressing himself.
Then came an unexpected difficulty: how were they to get up to the
house? Walking out to dinner, though it was merely through the village
and up the avenue seemed to Sir Louis to be a thing impossible. Indeed,
he was not well able to walk at all, and positively declared that he
should never be able to make his way over the gravel in pumps. His
mother would not have thought half as much of walking from Boxall Hill
to Greshamsbury and back again. At last, the one village fly was sent
for, and the matter was arranged.

When they reached the house, it was easy to see that there was some
unwonted bustle. In the drawing-room there was no one but Mr Mortimer
Gazebee, who introduced himself to them both. Sir Louis, who knew that
he was only an attorney, did not take much notice of him, but the doctor
entered into conversation.

'Have you not heard that Mr Gresham has come home?'

'Mr Gresham!  I did not know that he had been away.'

'Mr Gresham, junior, I mean.'  No, indeed; the doctor had not heard.
Frank had returned unexpectedly, just before dinner, and was now
undergoing his father's smiles, his mother's embraces, and his sisters'
questions.

'Quite unexpectedly,' said Mr Gazebee.  'I don't know what has brought
him back before his time. I suppose he found London too hot.'

'Deuced hot,' said the baronet.  'I found it so, at least.  I don't know
what keeps men in London when it's so hot; except those fellows who have
business to do: they're paid for it.'

Mr Mortimer Gazebee looked at him.  He was managing an estate which owed
Sir Louis an enormous sum of money, and, therefore, he could not afford
to despise the baronet; but he thought to himself, what a very abject
fellow the man would be if he were not a baronet, and had not a large
fortune!

And the squire came in.  His broad, honest face was covered with a smile
when he saw the doctor.

'Thorne,' said he, almost in a whisper, 'you're the best fellow
breathing; I have hardly deserved this.' The doctor, as he took his old
friend's hand, could not but be glad that he had followed Mary's
counsel.

'So Frank has come home?'

'Oh, yes; quite unexpectedly.  He was to have stayed a week longer in
London. You would hardly know him if you met him. Sir Louis, I beg your
pardon.' And the squire went up to his other guest, who had remained
somewhat sullenly standing in one corner of the room. He was the man of
highest rank present, or to be present, and he expected to be treated as
such.

'I am happy to have the pleasure of making your acquaintance, Mr
Gresham,' said the baronet, intending to be very courteous. 'Though we
have not met before, I very often see your name in my accounts--ha! ha!
ha!' and Sir Louis laughed as though he had said something very good.

The meeting between Lady Arabella and the doctor was rather distressing
to the former; but she managed to get over it. She shook hands with him
graciously, and said that it was a fine day. The doctor said that it was
fine, only perhaps a little rainy. And then they went into different
parts of the room.

When Frank came in, the doctor hardly did know him.  His hair was darker
than it had been, and so was his complexion; but his chief disguise was
in a long silken beard, which hung down over his cravat. The doctor had
hitherto not been much in favour of long beards, but he could not deny
that Frank looked very well with the appendage.

'Oh, doctor, I am so delighted to find you here,' said he, coming up to
him; 'so very, very glad:' and, taking the doctor's arm, he led him away
into a window, where they were alone. 'And how is Mary?' said he, almost
in a whisper. 'Oh, I wish she were here! But, doctor, it shall all come
in time. But tell me, doctor, there is no news about her, is there?'

'News--what news?'

'Oh, well; no news is good news: you will give her my love, won't you?'

The doctor said that he would.  What else could he say?   It appeared
quite clear to him that some of Mary's fears were groundless.

Frank was again very much altered.  It has been said, that though he was
a boy at twenty-one, he was a man at twenty-two. But now, at
twenty-three, he appeared to be almost a man of the world. His manners
were easy, his voice under his control, and words were at his command:
he was no longer either shy or noisy; but, perhaps, was open to the
charge of seeming, at least, to be too conscious of his own merits. He
was, indeed, very handsome; tall, manly, and powerfully built, his form
was such as women's eyes have ever loved to look upon. 'Ah, if he would
but marry money!' said Lady Arabella to herself, taken up by a mother's
natural admiration for her son. His sisters clung around him before
dinner, all talking to him at once. How proud a family of girls are of
one, big, tall, burly brother!

'You don't mean to tell me, Frank, that you are going to eat soup with
that beard?' said the squire, when they were seated round the table. He
had not ceased to rally his son as to this patriarchal adornment; but,
nevertheless, any one could have seen, with half and eye, that he was as
proud of it as were the others.

'Don't I, sir?  All I require is a relay of napkins for every course;'
and he went to work, covering it with every spoonful, as men with beards
always do.

'Well, if you like it!' said the squire, shrugging his shoulders.

'But I do like it,' said Frank.

'Oh, papa, you wouldn't have him cut it off,' said one of the twins. 'It
is so handsome.'

'I should like to work it into a chair-back instead of floss-silk,' said
the other twin.

'Thank 'ee, Sophy; I'll remember you for that.'

'Doesn't it look nice, and grand, and patriarchal?' said Beatrice,
turning to her neighbour.

'Patriarchal, certainly,' said Mr Oriel.  'I should grow one myself if I
had not the fear of the archbishop before my eyes.'

What was next said to him was in a whisper, audible only to himself.

'Doctor, did you know Wildman of the Ninth.  He was left as surgeon at
Scutari for two years. Why, my beard to his is only a little down.'

'A little way down, you mean,' said Mr Gazebee.

'Yes,' said Frank, resolutely set against laughing at Mr Gazebee's pun. 
'Why, his beard descends to his ankles, and he is obliged to tie it in a
bag at night, because his feet get entangled in it when he is asleep!'

'Oh, Frank!' said one of the girls.

This was all very well for the squire, and Lady Arabella, and the girls.
They were all delighted to praise Frank, and talk about him. Neither did
it come amiss to Mr Oriel and the doctor, who had both a personal
interest in the young hero. But Sir Louis did not like it at all. He was
the only baronet in the room, and yet nobody took any notice of him. He
was seated in the post of honour, next to Lady Arabella; but even Lady
Arabella seemed to think more of her own son than of him. Seeing he was
ill-used, he meditated revenge; but not the less did it behove him to
make some effort to attract attention.

'Was your ladyship in London, this season?'

Lady Arabella had not been in London at all this year, and it was a sore
subject with her. 'No,' said she, very graciously; 'circumstances have
kept us at home.'

'Ah, indeed!  I am very sorry for that; that must be very distressing to
a person like your ladyship. But things are mending, perhaps?'

Lady Arabella did not in the least understand him.  'Mending!' she said,
in her peculiar tone of aristocratic indifference; and then turned to Mr
Gazebee, who was on the other side of her.

Sir Louis was not going to stand this.  He was the first man in the
room, and he knew his own importance. It was not to be borne that Lady
Arabella should turn to talk to a dirty attorney, and leave him, a
baronet, to eat his dinner without notice. If nothing else would move
her, he would let her know who was the real owner of the Greshamsbury
title-deeds.

'I think I saw your ladyship out to-day, taking a ride,' Lady Arabella
had driven through the village in her pony-chair.

'I never ride,' said she, turning her head for one moment from Mr
Gazebee.

'In the one-horse carriage, I mean, my lady.  I was delighted with the
way you whipped him up round the corner.'

Whipped him up round the corner!  Lady Arabella could make no answer to
this; so she went on talking to Mr Gazebee. Sir Louis, repulsed, but not
vanquished-resolved not to be vanquished by any Lady Arabella-- turned
his attention to his plate for a minute or two, and then recommenced.

'The honour of a glass of wine with you, Lady Arabella,' said he.'

'I never take wine at dinner,' said Lady Arabella.  The man was becoming
intolerable to her, and she was beginning to fear that it would be
necessary for her to fly the room to get rid of him.

The baronet was again silent for a moment; but he was determined not to
be put down.

'This is a nice-looking country about her,' said he.

'Yes; very nice,' said Mr Gazebee, endeavouring to relieve the lady of
the mansion.

'I hardly know which I like best; this, or my own place at Boxall Hill. 
You have the advantage here in trees, and those sort of things. But, as
to the house, why, my box there is very comfortable, very. You'd hardly
know the place now, Lady Arabella, if you haven't seen it since my
governor bought it. How much do you think he spent about the house and
grounds, pineries included, you know, and those sort of things.'

Lady Arabella shook her head.

'Now guess, my lady,' said he.  But it was not to be supposed that Lady
Arabella should guess on such a subject.

'I never guess,' said she, with a look of ineffable disgust.

'What do you say, Mr Gazebee?'

'Perhaps a hundred thousand pounds.'

'What!  for a house!  You can't know much about money, nor yet about
building, I think, Mr Gazebee.'

'Not much,' said Mr Gazebee, 'as to such magnificent places as Boxall
Hill.'

'Well, my lady, if you won't guess, I'll tell you.  It cost twenty-two
thousand four hundred and nineteen pounds four shillings and eightpence.
I've all the accounts exact. Now, that's a tidy lot of money for a house
for a man to live in.'

Sir Louis spoke this in a loud tone, which at least commanded the
attention of the table. Lady Arabella, vanquished, bowed her head, and
said that it was a large sum; Mr Gazebee went on sedulously eating his
dinner; the squire was struck momentarily dumb in the middle of a long
chat with the doctor; even Mr Oriel ceased to whisper; and the girls
opened their eyes with astonishment. Before the end of his speech, Sir
Louis's voice had become very loud.

'Yes, indeed,' said Frank; 'a very tidy lot of money.  I'd have
generously dropped the four and eightpence if I'd been the architect.'

'It wasn't on one bill; but that's the tot.  I can show the bills;' and
Sir Louis, well pleased with his triumph, swallowed a glass of wine.

Almost immediately after the cloth was removed, Lady Arabella escaped,
and the gentlemen clustered together. Sir Louis found himself next to Mr
Oriel, and began to make himself agreeable.

'A very nice girl, Miss Beatrice; very nice.'

Now Mr Oriel was a modest man, and, when thus addressed as to his future
wife, found it difficult to make any reply.

'You parsons always have your own luck,' said Sir Louis.  'You get all
the beauty, and generally all the money, too. Not much of the latter in
this case, though--eh?'

Mr Oriel was dumbfounded.  He had never said a word any creature as to
Beatrice's dowry; and when Mr Gresham had told him, with sorrow, that
his daughter's portion must be small, he had at once passed away from
the subject as one that was hardly fit for conversation, even between
him and his future father-in-law; and now he was abruptly questioned on
the subject by a man he had never seen before in his life. Of course, he
could make no answer.

'The squire has muddled his matters most uncommonly,' continued Sir
Louis, filling his glass for the second time before he passed the
bottle. 'What do you suppose now he owes me alone; just at one lump, you
know?'

Mr Oriel had nothing for it but to run.  He could make no answer, nor
would he sit there for tidings as to Mr Gresham's embarrassments. So he
fairly retreated, without having said one word to his neighbour, finding
such discretion to be the only kind of valour left to him.

'What, Oriel!  off already?' said the squire.  'Anything the matter?'

'Oh, no; nothing particular.  I'm not just quite--I think I will go out
for a few minutes.'

'See what it is to be in love,' said the squire, half-whispering to Dr
Thorne. 'You're not in the same way, I hope?'

Sir Louis then shifted his seat again, and found himself next to Frank. 
Mr Gazebee was opposite to him, and the doctor opposite to Frank.

'Parson seems peekish, I think,' said the baronet.

'Peekish!?' said the squire, inquisitively.

'Rather down on his luck.  He's decently well off himself, isn't he?'

There was another pause, and nobody seemed inclined to answer the
question.

'I mean, he's got something more than his bare living.'

'Oh, yes,' said Frank, laughing.  'He's got what will buy him bread and
cheese when the Rads shut up the Church:--unless, indeed, they shut up
the Funds too.'

'Ah, there's nothing like land,'said Sir Louis: 'nothing like dirty
acres; is there, squire?'

'Land is a very good investment, certainly,' said the Mr Gresham.

'The best going,' said the other, who was now, as people say when they
mean to be good-natured, slightly under the influence of liquor. 'The
best going--eh, Gazebee?'

Mr Gazebee gathered himself up, and turned away his head, looking out of
the window.

'You lawyers never like to give an opinion without money, ha! ha! ha! Do
they, Mr Gresham? You and I have had to pay for plenty of them, and will
have to pay plenty more before they let us alone.'

Here Mr Gazebee got up, and followed Mr Oriel out of the room. He was
not, of course, on such intimate terms in the house as was Mr Oriel; but
he hoped to be forgiven by the ladies in consequence of the severity of
the miseries to which he was subjected. He and Mr Oriel were soon to be
seen through the dining-room window, walking about the grounds with the
two eldest Miss Greshams. And Patience Oriel, who had also been of the
party, was also to be seen with the twins. Frank looked at his father
with almost a malicious smile, and began to think that he too might be
better employed out among the walks. Did he think then of a former
summer evening, when he had half broken Mary's heart by walking there
too lovingly with Patience Oriel?

Sir Louis, if he continued his brilliant career of success, would soon
be left the cock of the walk. The squire, to be sure, could not bolt,
nor could the doctor very well; but they might be equally vanquished,
remaining there in their chairs. Dr Thorne, during all this time, was
sitting with tingling ears. Indeed, it may be said that his whole body
tingled. He was in a manner responsible for this horrible scene; but
what could he do to stop it? He could not take Sir Louis up bodily and
carry him away. One idea did occur to him. The fly had been ordered for
ten o'clock. He could rush out and send for it instantly.

'You're not going to leave me?' said the squire, in a voice of horror,
as he saw the doctor rising from his chair.

'Oh, no, no, no,' said the doctor; and then he whispered the purpose of
his mission. 'I will be back in two minutes.' The doctor would have
given twenty pounds to have closed the scene at once; but he was not the
man to desert his friend in such a strait as that.

'He's a well-meaning fellow, the doctor,' said Sir Louis, when his
guardian was out of the room, 'very; but he's not up to trap--not at
all.'

'Up to trap--well, I should say he was; that is, if I know what trap
means,' said Frank.

'Ah, but that's just the ticket.  Do you know?  Now I say Dr Thorne's
not a man of the world.'

'He's about the best man I know, or ever heard of,' said the squire.
'And if any man ever had a good friend, you have got one in him; and so
have I:' and the squire silently drank the doctor's health.

'All very true, I dare say; but yet he's not up to trap.  Now look here,
squire--'

'If you don't mind, sir,' said Frank, 'I've got something very
particular--perhaps, however--'

'Stay till Thorne returns, thanks Frank.'

Frank did stay till Thorne returned, and then escaped.

'Excuse me, doctor,' said he, 'but I've something very particular to
say; I'll explain to-morrow.' And then the three were left alone.

Sir Louis was no becoming almost drunk, and was knocking his words
together. The squire had already attempted to stop the bottle; but the
baronet had contrived to get hold of a modicum of Madeira, and there was
no preventing him from helping himself; at least, none at the moment.

'As we were saying about lawyers,' continued Sir Louis.  'Let's see,
what were we saying? Why, squire, it's just here. These fellows will
fleece us both if we don't mind what we are after.'

'Never mind about lawyers now,' said Dr Thorne, angrily.

'Ah, but I do mind; most particularly.  That's all very well for you,
doctor; you've nothing to lose. You've no great stake in the matter.
Why, now, what sum of money of mine do you think those d---- doctors are
handling?'

'D---- doctors!' said the squire in a tone of dismay.

'Lawyers, I mean, of course.  Why, now, Gresham, we're all totted now,
you see; you're down in my books, I take it, for pretty near a hundred
thousand pounds.'

'Hold your tongue, sir,' said the doctor, getting up.

'Hold my tongue!' said Sir Louis.

'Sir Louis Scatcherd,' said the squire, slowly rising from his chair,
'we will not, if you please, talk about business at the present moment.
Perhaps we had better go to the ladies.'

This latter proposition had certainly not come from the squire's heart:
going to the ladies was the very last thing for which Sir Louis was now
fit. But the squire had said it as being the only recognised formal way
he could think of for breaking up the symposium.

'Oh, very well,' hiccupped the baronet, 'I'm always ready for the
ladies,' and he stretched out his hand to the decanter to get a last
glass of Madeira.

'No,' said the doctor, rising stoutly, and speaking with a determined
voice. 'No; you will have no more wine.'

'What's all this about?' said Sir Louis, with a drunken laugh.

'Of course he cannot go into the drawing-room, Mr Gresham.  If you will
leave him here with me, I will stay with him, till the fly comes. Pray
tell Lady Arabella from me how sorry I am that this has occurred.'

The squire took him by the hand affectionately.  'I've seen a tipsy man
before to-night,' said he.

'Yes,' said the doctor, 'and so have I, but--' He did not express the
rest of his thoughts.



CHAPTER XXXVI

WILL HE COME AGAIN?

Long before the doctor returned home after the little dinner-party above
described, Mary had learnt that Frank was already at Greshamsbury. She
had heard nothing of him, not a word, nothing in the shape of a message,
for twelve months; and at her age twelve months is a long period. Would
he come and see her in spite of his mother? Would he send her any
tidings of is return, or notice her in any way? If he did not, what
would she do? and if he did, what then would she do? It was so hard to
resolve; so hard to be deserted; and so hard to dare to wish that she
might not be deserted! She continued to say to herself, that it would be
better that they should be strangers; and she could hardly keep herself
from tears in the fear that they might be so. What chance could there be
that he should care for her, after an absence spent in travelling over
the world? No; she would forget that affair of his hand; and then,
immediately after having so determined, she would confess to herself
that it was a thing not to be forgotten, and impossible of oblivion.

On her uncle's return, she would hear some word about him; and so she
sat alone, with a book before her, of which she could not read a line.
She expected them about eleven, and was, therefore, rather surprised
when the fly stopped at the door before nine.

She immediately heard her uncle's voice, loud and angry, calling for
Thomas. Both Thomas and Bridget were unfortunately out, being, at this
moment, forgetful of all sublunary cares, and seated in happiness under
a beech-tree in the park. Janet flew to the little gate, and there found
Sir Louis insisting that he would be taken at once to his own mansion at
Boxall Hill, and positively swearing that he would not longer submit to
the insult of the doctor's surveillance.

In the absence of Thomas, the doctor was forced to apply for assistance
to the driver of the fly. Between them the baronet was dragged out of
the vehicle, the windows suffered much, and the doctor's hat also. In
this way, he was taken upstairs, and was at last put to bed, Janet
assisting: nor did the doctor leave the room till his guest was asleep.
Then he went into the drawing-room to Mary. It may easily be conceived
that he was hardly in a humour to talk much about Frank Gresham.

'What am I to do with him?' said he, almost in tears: 'what am I to do
with him?'

'Can you send him to Boxall Hill?' asked Mary.

'Yes; to kill himself there!  But it is no matter; he will kill himself
somewhere. Oh! what that family have done for me!' And then, suddenly
remembering a portion of their doings, he took Mary in his arms, and
kissed and blessed her; and declared that, in spite of all this, he was
a happy man.

There was no word about Frank that night.  The next morning the doctor
found Sir Louis very weak, and begging for stimulants. He was worse than
weak; he was in such a state of wretched misery and mental prostration;
so low in heart, in such collapse of energy and spirit, that Dr Thorne
thought it prudent to remove his razors from his reach.

'For God's sake do let me have a little chasse-cafe; I'm always used to
it; ask Joe if I'm not! You don't want to kill me, do you?' And the
baronet cried piteously, like a child, and, when the doctor left him for
the breakfast-table, abjectly implored Janet to get him some curacoa
which he knew was in one of his portmanteaus. Janet, however, was true
to her master.

The doctor did give him some wine; and then, having left strict orders
as to his treatment--Bridget and Thomas being now both in the
house--went forth to some of his too much neglected patients.

Then Mary was again alone, and her mind flew away to her lover. How
should she be able to compose herself when she should first see him? See
him she must. People cannot live in the same village without meeting. If
she passed him at the church-door, as she often passed Lady Arabella,
what should she do? Lady Arabella always smiled a peculiar, little,
bitter smile, and this, with half a nod of recognition, carried off the
meeting. Should she try the bitter smile, the half-nod with Frank? Alas!
she knew it was not in her to be so much mistress of her own heart's
blood.

As she thus thought, she stood in the drawing-room window, looking out
into her garden; and, as she leant against the sill, her head was
surrounded by the sweet creepers. 'At any rate, he won't come here,' she
said: and so, with a deep sigh, she turned from the window into the
room.

There he was, Frank Gresham himself standing there in her immediate
presence, beautiful as Apollo. Her next thought was how she might escape
from out of his arms. How it happened that she had fallen into them, she
never knew.

'Mary! my own, own love! my own one! sweetest! dearest! best! Mary! dear
Mary! have you not a word to say to me?'

No; she had not a word, though her life depended on it.  The exertion
necessary for not crying was quite enough for her. This, then, was the
bitter smile and the half-nod that was to pass between them; this was
the manner in which estrangement was to grow into indifference; this was
the mode of meeting by which she was to prove that she was mistress of
her conduct, if not her heart! There he held her close bound to his
breast, and she could only protect her face, and that all ineffectually,
with her hands. 'He loves another,' Beatrice had said. 'At any rate, he
will not love me,' her own heart had said also. Here now was the answer.

'You know you cannot marry him,' Beatrice had said, also.  Ah! if that
really were so, was not this embrace deplorable for them both? And yet
how could she not be happy? She endeavoured to repel him; but with what
a weak endeavour! Her pride had been wounded to the core, not by Lady
Arabella's scorn, but by the conviction which had grown on her, that
though she had given her own heart absolutely away, had parted with it
wholly and for ever, she had received nothing in return. The world, her
world, would know that she had loved, and loved in vain. But here now
was the loved one at her feet; the first moment that his enforced
banishment was over, had brought him here. How could she not be happy?

They all said that she could not marry him.  Well, perhaps it might be
so; nay, when she thought of it, must not that edict too probably be
true? But if so, it would not be his fault. He was true to her, and that
satisfied her pride. He had taken from her, by surprise, a confession of
her love. She had often regretted her weakness in allowing him to do so;
but she could not regret it now. She could endure to suffer; nay, it
would not be suffering while he suffered with her.

'Not one word, Mary?  Then after all my dreams, after all my patience,
you do not love me at last?'

Oh, Frank!  notwithstanding what has been said in thy praise, what a
fool thou art! Was any word necessary for thee? Had not her heart beat
against thine? Had she not borne thy caresses? Had there been one touch
of anger when she warded off thy threatened kisses? Bridget, in the
kitchen, when Jonah became amorous, smashed his nose with the
rolling-pin. But when Thomas sinned, perhaps as deeply, she only talked
of doing so. Miss Thorne, in the drawing-room, had she needed
self-protection, could doubtless have found the means, though the
process would probably have been less violent.

At last Mary succeeded in her efforts at enfranchisement, and she and
Frank stood at some little distance from each other. She could not but
marvel at him. That long, soft beard, which just now had been so close
to her face, was all new; his whole look was altered; his mien, and
gait, and very voice were not the same. Was this, indeed, the very Frank
who had chattered of his boyish love, two years since, in the gardens at
Greshamsbury?

'Not one word of welcome, Mary?'

'Indeed, Mr Gresham, you are welcome home.'

'Mr Gresham!  Tell me, Mary--tell me at once--has anything happened?  I
could not ask up there.'

'Frank,' she said, and then stopped; not being able at the moment to get
any further.

'Speak to me honestly, Mary; honestly and bravely.  I offered you my
hand once before; there it is again. Will you take it?'

She looked wistfully up in his eyes; and would fain have taken it.  But
though a girl may be honest in such a case, it is so hard for her to be
brave.

He still held out his hand.  'Mary,' said he, 'if you can value it, it
shall be yours through good fortune or ill fortune. There may be
difficulties; but if you can love me, we will get over them. I am a free
man; free to do as I please with myself, except so far as I am bound to
you. There is my hand. Will you have it?' And then he, too, looked into
her eyes, and waited composedly, as though determined to have an answer.

She slowly raised her hand, and, as she did so, her eyes fell to the
ground. It then drooped again, and was again raised; and, at last, her
light tapering fingers rested on his broad open palm.

They were soon clutched, and the whole hand brought absolutely within
his grasp. 'There, now you are my own!' he said, 'and none of them shall
part us; my own Mary, my own wife.'

'Oh, Frank, is not this imprudent?  Is it not wrong?'

'Imprudent!  I am sick of prudence.  I hate prudence.  And as for
wrong--no. I say it is not wrong; certainly not wrong if we love each
other. And you do love me, Mary--eh? You do! don't you?'

He would not excuse her, or allow her to escape from saying it in so
many words; and when the words did come at last, they came freely. 'Yes,
Frank, I do love you; if that were all you would have no cause for
fear.'

'And I will have no cause for fear.'

'Ah; but your father, Frank, and my uncle.  I can never bring myself to
do anything that shall bring either of them to sorrow.'

Frank, of course, ran through all his arguments.  He would go into a
profession, or take a farm and live in it. He would wait; that is, for a
few months. 'A few months, Frank!' said Mary. 'Well, perhaps six.' 'Oh,
Frank!' But Frank would not be stopped. He would do anything that his
father might ask him. Anything but the one thing. He would not give up
the wife he had chosen. It would not be reasonable, or proper, or
righteous that he should be asked to do so; and here he mounted a
somewhat high horse.

Mary had no arguments which she could bring from her heart to offer in
opposition of all this. She could only leave her hand in his, and feel
that she was happier than she had been at any time since the day of the
donkey-ride at Boxall Hill.

'But, Mary,' continued he, becoming very grave and serious.  'We must be
true to each other, and firm in this. Nothing that any of them can say
shall drive me from my purpose; will you say as much?'

Her hand was still in his, and so she stood, thinking for a moment
before she answered him. But she could not do less for him than he was
willing to do for her. 'Yes,' said she--said in a very low voice, and
with a manner perfectly quiet--'I will be firm. Nothing that they can
say shall shake me. But, Frank, it cannot be soon.'

Nothing further occurred in this interview which needs recording. Frank
had been three times told by Mary that he had better go before he did
go; and, at last, she was obliged to take the matter into her own hands,
and lead him to the door.

'You are in a great hurry to get rid of me,' said he.

'You have been here two hours, and you must go now; what will they
think?'

'Who cares what they think?  Let them think the truth: that's after a
year's absence, I have much to say to you.' However, at last, he did go,
and Mary was left alone.

Frank, although he had been so slow to move, had a thousand other things
to do, and went about them at once. He was very much in love, no doubt;
but that did not interfere with his interest in other pursuits. In the
first place, he had to see Harry Baker, and Harry Baker's stud. Harry
had been specially charged to look after the black horse during Frank's
absence, and the holiday doings of that valuable animal had to be
inquired into. Then the kennel of the hounds had to be visited, and--as
a matter of second-rate importance--the master. This could not be done
on the same day; but a plan for doing so must be concocted with
Harry--and then there were the two young pointer pups.

Frank, when he left his betrothed, went about these things quite as
vehemently as though he were not in love at all; quite as vehemently as
though he had said nothing as to going into some profession which must
necessarily separate him from horses and dogs. But Mary sat there at her
window, thinking of her love, and thinking of nothing else. It was all
in all to her now. She had pledged herself not to be shaken from her
troth by anything, by any person; and it would behove her to be true to
this pledge. True to it, though all the Greshams but one should oppose
her with all their power; true to it, even though her own uncle should
oppose her.

And how could she have done any other than to pledge herself, invoked to
it as she had been? How could she do less for him than he was so anxious
to do for her? They would talk to her of maiden delicacy, and tell her
that she had put a stain on that snow-white coat of proof, in confessing
her love for one whose friends were unwilling to receive her. Let them
so talk. Honour, honesty, and truth, out-spoken truth, self-denying
truth, and fealty from man to man, are worth more than maiden delicacy;
more, at any rate, than the talk of it. It was not for herself that this
pledge had been made. She knew her position, and the difficulties of it;
she knew also the value of it. He had much to offer, much to give; she
had nothing but herself. He had name, and old repute, family, honour,
and what eventually would at least be wealth to her. She was nameless,
fameless, portionless. He had come there with all his ardour, with the
impulse of his character, and asked her for her love. It was already his
own. He had then demanded her troth, and she acknowledged that he had a
right to demand it. She would be his if ever it should be in his power
to take her.

But there let the bargain end.  She would always remember, that though
it was in her power to keep her pledge, it might too probably not be in
his power to keep his. That doctrine, laid down so imperatively by the
great authorities of Greshamsbury, that edict, which demanded that Frank
should marry money, had come home also to her with a certain force. It
would be sad that the fame of Greshamsbury should perish, and that the
glory should depart from the old house. It might be, that Frank also
should perceive that he must marry money. It would be a pity that he had
not seen it sooner; but she, at any rate, would not complain.

And so she stood, leaning on the open window, with her book unnoticed
lying beside her. The sun had been in the mid-sky when Frank had left
her, but its rays were beginning to stream into the room from the west
before she moved from her position. Her first thought in the morning had
been this: Would he come to see her? Her last now was more soothing to
her, less full of absolute fear: Would it be right that he should come
again?

The first sounds she heard were the footsteps of her uncle, as he came
up to the drawing-room, three steps at a time. His step was always
heavy; but when he was disturbed in spirit, it was slow; when merely
fatigued in body by ordinary work, it was quick.

'What a broiling day!' he said, and he threw himself into a chair. 'For
mercy's sake, give me something to drink.' Now the doctor was a great
man for summer-drinks. In his house, lemonade, currant-juice,
orange-mixtures, and raspberry-vinegar were used by the quart. He
frequently disapproved of these things for his patients, as being apt to
disarrange the digestion; but he consumed enough himself to throw a
large family into such difficulties.

'Ha-a!' he ejaculated after a draught; 'I'm better now.  Well, what's
the news?'

'You've been out, uncle; you ought to have the news.  How's Mrs Green?'

'Really as bad as ennui and solitude can make her.'

'And Mrs Oaklerath?'

'She's getting better, because she has ten children to look after, and
twins to suckle. What has he been doing?' And the doctor pointed towards
the room occupied by Sir Louis.

Mary's conscience struck her that she had not even asked.  She had
hardly remembered, during the whole day, that the baronet was in the
house. 'I do not think he has been doing much,' she said. 'Janet has
been with him all day.'

'Has he been drinking?'

'Upon my word, I don't know, uncle.  I think not, for Janet has been
with him. But, uncle--'

'Well, dear--but just give me a little more of that tipple.'

Mary prepared the tumbler, and as she handed it to him, she said, 'Frank
Gresham has been here to-day.'

The doctor swallowed his draught, and put down the glass before he made
any reply, and even then he said but little.

'Oh!  Frank Gresham.'

'Yes, uncle.'

'You thought him looking pretty well?'

'Yes, uncle; he was very well, I believe.'

Dr Thorne had nothing more to say, so he got up and went to his patient
in the next room.

'If he disapproves of it, why does he not say so?' said Mary to herself.
'Why does he not advise me?'

But it was not so easy to give advice while Sir Louis Scatcherd was
lying there in that state.



CHAPTER XXXVII

SIR LOUIS LEAVES GRESHAMSBURY

Janet had been sedulous in her attentions to Sir Louis, and had not
troubled her mistress; but she had not had an easy time of it. Her
orders had been, that either she or Thomas should remain in the room the
whole day, and those orders had been obeyed.

Immediately after breakfast, the baronet had inquired after his own
servant. 'His confounded nose must be right by this time, I suppose?'

'It was very bad, Sir Louis,' said the old woman, who imagined that it
might be difficult to induce Jonah to come into the house again.

'A man in such a place as his has no business to be laid up,' said his
master, with a whine. 'I'll see and get a man who won't break his nose.'

Thomas was sent to the inn three or four times, but in vain. The man was
sitting up, well enough, in the tap-room; but the middle of his face was
covered with streaks of plaster, and he could not bring himself to
expose his wounds before his conqueror.

Sir Louis began by ordering the woman to bring him chasse-cafe. She
offered him coffee, as much as he would; but no chasse. 'A glass of port
wine,' she said, at twelve o'clock, and another at three had been
ordered for him.

'I don't care a--for the orders,' said Sir Louis; 'send me my own man.' 
The man was again sent for; but would not come. 'There's a bottle of
that stuff that I take, in that portmanteau, in the left-hand
corner--just hand it to me.'

But Janet was not to be done.  She would give him no stuff, except what
the doctor had ordered, till the doctor came back. The doctor would
then, no doubt, give him anything that was proper.

Sir Louis swore a good deal, and stormed as much as he could. He drank,
however, his two glasses of wine, and he got no more. Once or twice he
essayed to get out of bed and dress; but, at every effort, he found that
he could not do it without Joe: and there he was, still under the
clothes when the doctor returned.

'I'll tell you what it is,' said he, as soon as his guardian entered the
room, 'I'm not going to be made a prisoner of here.'

'A prisoner!  no, surely not.'

'It seems very much like it at present.  Your servant here--that old
woman--takes it upon her to say she'll do nothing without your orders.'

'Well; she's right there.'

'Right!  I don't know what you call right; but I won't stand it.  You
are not going to make a child of me, Dr Thorne; so you need not think
it.'

And then there was a long quarrel, between them, and but an indifferent
reconciliation. The baronet said that he would go to Boxall Hill, and
was vehement in his intention to do so because the doctor opposed it. He
had not, however, as yet ferreted out the squire, or given a bit of his
mind to Mr Gazebee, and it behoved him to do this before he took himself
off to his own country mansion. He ended, therefore, by deciding to go
on the next day but one.

'Let it be so, if you are well enough,' said the doctor.

'Well enough!' said the other, with a sneer.  'There's nothing to make
me ill that I know of. It certainly won't be drinking too much here.'

On the next day, Sir Louis was in a different mood, and in one more
distressing for the doctor to bear. His compelled absence from
intemperate drinking had, no doubt, been good for him; but his mind had
so much sunk under the pain of the privation, that his state was piteous
to behold. He had cried for his servant, as a child cries for its nurse,
till at last the doctor, moved to pity, had himself gone out and brought
the man in from the public-house. But when he did come, Joe was of but
little service to his master, as he was altogether prevented from
bringing him either wine or spirits; and when he searched for the
liqueur-case, he found that even that had been carried away.

'I believe you want me to die,' he said, as the doctor, sitting by his
bedside, was tyring, for the hundredth time, to make him understand that
he had but one chance of living.

The doctor was not in the least irritated.  It would have been as wise
to be irritated by the want of reason in a dog.

'I am doing what I can to save your life,' he said calmly; 'but as you
said just now, I have no power over you. As long as you are able to move
and remain in my house, you certainly shall not have the means of
destroying yourself. You will be very wise to stay here for a week or
ten days: a week or ten days of healthy living might, perhaps, bring you
round.'

Sir Louis again declared that the doctor wished him to die, and spoke of
sending for his attorney Finnie, to come to Greshamsbury to look after
him.

'Send for him if you choose,' said the doctor.  'His coming will cost
you three or four pounds, but can do no other harm.'

It was certainly hard upon Dr Thorne that he should be obliged to
entertain such a guest in the house;--to entertain him, and foster him,
and care for him, almost as though he were a son. But he had no
alternative; he had accepted the charge from Sir Roger, and he must go
through with it. His conscience, moreover, allowed him no rest in the
matter: it harassed him day and night, driving him on sometimes to great
wretchedness. He could not love this incubus that was on his shoulders;
he could not do other than be very far from loving him. Of what use or
value was he to any one? What could the world make of him that would be
good, or he of the world? Was not an early death his certain fate? The
earlier it might be, would it not be better? Were he to linger on yet
for two years longer--and such a space of life was possible for him--how
great would be the mischief that he might do; nay, certainly would do!
Farewell then to all hopes for Greshamsbury, as far as Mary was
concerned. Farewell then to that dear scheme which lay deep in the
doctor's heart, that hope that he might in his niece's name, give back
to the son the lost property of his father. And might not one year--six
months be as fatal. Frank, they all said, must marry money; and even
he--he the doctor himself, much as he despised the idea for money's
sake--even he could not but confess that Frank, as the heir to an old,
but grievously embarrassed property, had no right to marry, at his early
age, a girl without a shilling. Mary, his niece, his own child, would
probably be the heiress of this immense wealth; but he could not tell
this to Frank; no, nor to Frank's father, while Sir Louis was yet alive.
What, if by so doing he should achieve this marriage for his niece, and
that then Sir Louis should live to dispose of his own? How then would he
face the anger of Lady Arabella?

'I will never hanker after a dead man's shoes, neither for myself nor
for another,' he had said to himself a hundred times; and as often did
he accuse himself of doing so. One path, however, was plainly open
before him. He would keep his peace as to the will; and would use such
efforts as he might use for a son of his own loins to preserve the life
that was so valueless. His wishes, his hopes, his thoughts, he could not
control; but his conduct was at his own disposal.

'I say, doctor, you don't really think that I'm going to die?' Sir Louis
said, when Dr Thorne again visited him.

'I don't think at all; I am sure you will kill yourself if you continue
to live as you have lately done.'

'But suppose I go all right for a while, and live--live just as you tell
me, you know?'

'All of us are in God's hands, Sir Louis.  By so doing you will, at any
rate, give yourself the best chance.'

'Best chance?  Why, d--n, doctor!  there are fellows have done ten times
worse than I; and they are not going to kick. Come, now, I know you are
trying to frighten me; ain't you now?'

'I am trying to do the best I can for you.'

'It's very hard on a fellow like me; I have nobody to say a kind word to
me; no, not one.' And Sir Louis, in his wretchedness, began to weep.
'Come, doctor; if you'll put me once more on my legs, I'll let you draw
on the estate for five hundred pounds; by G--, I will.'

The doctor went away to his dinner, and the baronet also had his in bed.
He could not eat much, but he was allowed two glasses of wine, and also
a little brandy in his coffee. This somewhat invigorated him, and when
Dr Thorne again went t