o him, in the evening, he did not find him so
utterly prostrated in spirit. He had, indeed, made up his mind to a
great resolve; and thus unfolded his final scheme for his own
reformation:-

'Doctor,' he began again, 'I believe you are an honest fellow; I do
indeed.'

Dr Thorne could not but thank him for his good opinion.

'You ain't annoyed at what I said this morning, are you?'

The doctor had forgotten the particular annoyance to which Sir Louis
alluded; and informed him that his mind might be at rest on any such
matter.

'I do believe you'd be glad to see me well; wouldn't you, now?'

The doctor assured him that such was in very truth the case.

'Well, now, I'll tell you what: I've been thinking about it a great deal
to-day; indeed, I have, and I want to do what is right. Mightn't I have
a little drop of that stuff, just in a cup of coffee?'

The doctor poured him out a cup of coffee, and put about a teaspoonful
of brandy in it. Sir Louis took it with a disconsolate face, not having
been accustomed to such measures in the use of his favourite beverage.

'I do wish to do what is right--I do, indeed; only, you see, I'm lonely.
As to those fellows up in London, I don't think that one of them cares a
straw about me.'

Dr Thorne was of the same way of thinking, and he said so.  He could not
but feel some sympathy with the unfortunate man as he thus spoke of his
own lot. It was true that he had been thrown on the world without any
one to take care of him.

'My dear friend, I will do the best I can in every way; I will, indeed. 
I do believe that your companions in town have been too ready to lead
you astray. Drop them, and you may yet do well.'

'May I though, doctor?  Well, I will drop them.  There's Jenkins; he's
the best of them; but even he is always wanting to make money of me. Not
but what I'm up to the best of them in that way.'

'You had better leave London, Sir Louis, and change your mode of life.
Go to Boxall Hill for a while; for two or three days or so; live with
your mother there and take to farming.'

'What!  farming?'

'Yes; that's what all country gentlemen do: take the land there into
your own hand, and occupy your mind upon it.'

'Well, doctor, I will--upon one condition.'

Dr Thorne sat still and listened.  He had no idea what the condition
might be, but he was not prepared to promise acquiescence till he heard
it.

'You know what I told you once before,' said the baronet.

'I don't remember at this moment.'

'About my getting married, you know.'

The doctor's brow grew black, and promised no help to the poor wretch.
Bad in every way, wretched, selfish, sensual, unfeeling, purse-proud,
ignorant as Sir Louis Scatcherd was still, there was left to him the
power of feeling something like sincere love. It may be presumed that he
did love Mary Thorne, and that he was at the time earnest in declaring
that if she could be given to him, he would endeavour to live according
to her uncle's counsel. It was only a trifle he asked; but, alas! that
trifle could not be vouchsafed.

'I should much approve of your getting married, but I do not know how I
can help you.'

'Of course, I mean Miss Mary: I do love her; I really do, Dr Thorne.'

'It is quite impossible, Sir Louis; quite.  You do my niece much honour;
but I am able to answer for her, positively, that such a proposition is
quite out of the question.'

'Look here now, Dr Thorne; anything in the way of settlements--'

'I will not hear a word on the subject: you are very welcome to the use
of my house as long as it may suit you to remain here; but I must insist
that my niece shall not be troubled on this matter.'

'Do you mean to say she's in love with that young Gresham?'

This was too much for the doctor's patience.  'Sir Louis,' said he, 'I
can forgive you much for your father's sake. I can also forgive
something on the score of your own ill-health. But you ought to know,
you ought by this time to have learnt, that there are some things which
a man cannot forgive. I will not talk to you about my niece; and
remember this, also, I will not have her troubled by you:' and, so
saying, the doctor left him.

On the next day the baronet was sufficiently recovered to be able to
resume his braggadocio airs. He swore at Janet; insisted on being served
by his own man; demanded in a loud voice, but in vain, that his
liqueur-case should be restored to him; and desired that post-horses
might be ready for him on the morrow. On that day he got up and ate his
dinner in his bedroom. On the next morning he countermanded the horses,
informing the doctor that he did so because he had little bit of
business to transact with Squire Gresham before he left the place! With
some difficulty, the doctor made him understand that the squire would
not see him on business; and it was at last decided, that Mr Gazebee
should be invited to call on him at the doctor's house; and this Mr
Gazebee agreed to do, in order to prevent the annoyance of having the
baronet up at Greshamsbury.

On this day, the evening before Mr Gazebee's visit, Sir Louis
condescended to come down to dinner. He dined, however, tete-a-tete with
the doctor. Mary was not there, nor was anything said as to her absence.
Sir Louis Scatcherd never set eyes upon her again.

He bore himself arrogantly on that evening, having resumed the airs and
would-be dignity which he thought belonged to him as a man of rank and
property. In his periods of low spirits, he was abject and humble
enough; abject and fearful of the lamentable destiny which at these
moments he believed to be in store for him. But it was one of the
peculiar symptoms of his state, that as he partially recovered his
bodily health, the tone of his mind recovered itself also, and his fears
for the time were relieved.

There was very little said between him and the doctor that evening. The
doctor sat, guarding the wine, and thinking when he should have his
house to himself again. Sir Louis sat moody, every now and then uttering
some impertinence as to the Greshams and the Greshamsbury property, and,
at an early hour, allowed Joe to put him to bed.

The horses were ordered on the next day for three, and, as two, Mr
Gazebee came to the house. He had never been there before, nor had he
ever met Dr Thorne except at the squire's dinner. On this occasion he
asked only for the baronet.

'Ah! ah!   I'm glad you're come, Mr Gazebee; very glad,' said Sir Louis;
acting the part of the rich, great man with all the power he had. 'I
want to ask you a few questions so as to make it all clear sailing
between us.'

'As you have asked to see me, I have come, Sir Louis,' said the other,
putting on much dignity as he spoke. 'But would it not be better that
any business there may be should be done among the lawyers?'

'The lawyers are very well, I dare say; but when a man has so large a
stake at interest as I have in this Greshamsbury property, why, you see,
Mr Gazebee, he feels a little inclined to look after it himself. Now, do
you know, Mr Gazebee, how much it is that Mr Gresham owes me?'

Mr Gazebee, of course, did know very well; but he was not going to
discuss the subject with Sir Louis, if he could help it.

'Whatever claim your father's estate may have on that of Mr Gresham is,
as far as I understand, vested in Dr Thorne's hands as trustee. I am
inclined to believe that you have not yourself at present any claim on
Greshamsbury. The interest, as it becomes due, is paid to Dr Thorne; and
if I may be allowed to make a suggestion, I would say that it will not
be expedient to make any change in that arrangement till the property
shall come into your own hands.'

'I differ from you entirely, Mr Gazebee; in toto as we used to say at
Eton. What you mean to say is--I can't go to law with Mr Gresham; I'm
not so sure of that; but perhaps not. But I can compel Dr Thorne to look
after my interests. I can force him to foreclose. And to tell you the
truth, Gazebee, unless some arrangement is proposed to me which I shall
think advantageous, I shall do so at once. There is near a hundred
thousand pounds owing to me; yes to me. Thorne is only a name in the
matter. The money is my money; and, by ---, I mean to look after it.'

'Haven't you any doubt, Sir Louis, as to the money being secure?'

'Yes, I have.  It isn't so easy to have a hundred thousand pounds
secured. The squire is a poor man, and I don't choose to allow a poor
man to owe me such a sum as that. Besides, I mean to invest in land. I
tell you fairly, therefore, I shall foreclose.'

Mr Gazebee, using all the perspicuity which his professional education
had left to him, tried to make Sir Louis understand that he had no power
to do anything of the kind.

'No power!  Mr Gresham shall see whether I have no power.  When a man
has a hundred thousand pounds owing to him he ought to have some power;
and, as I take it, he has. But we will see. Perhaps you know Finnie, do
you?'

Mr Gazebee, with a good deal of scorn in his face, said that he had not
that pleasure. Mr Finnie was not in his line.

'Well, you will know him then, and you'll find he's sharp enough; that
is, unless, I have some offer made to me that I may choose to accept.'
Mr Gazebee declared that he was not instructed to make any offer, and so
he took his leave.

On that afternoon, Sir Louis went off to Boxall Hill, transferring the
miserable task of superintending his self-destruction from the shoulders
of the doctor to those of his mother. Of Lady Scatcherd, the baronet
took no account in his proposed sojourn in the country, nor did he take
much of the doctor in leaving Greshamsbury. He again wrapped himself in
his furs, and, with tottering steps, climbed up into the barouche which
was to carry him away.

'Is my man up behind?' he said to Janet, while the doctor was standing
at the little front garden-gate, making his adieux.

'No, sir, he is not up yet,' said Janet, respectfully.

'Then send him out, will you?  I can't lose my time waiting here all
day.'

'I shall come over to Boxall Hill and see you,' said the doctor, whose
heart softened towards the man, in spite of his brutality, as the hour
of his departure came.

'I shall be happy to see you if you like to come, of course; that is, in
the way of visiting, and that sort of thing. As for doctoring, if I want
any I shall send for Fillgrave.' Such were his last words as the
carriage, with a rush, went off from the door.

The doctor, as he re-entered the house, could not avoid smiling, for he
thought of Dr Fillgrave's last patient at Boxall Hill. 'It's a question
to me,' said he to himself, 'whether Fillgrave will ever be induced to
make another visit to that house, even with the object of rescuing a
baronet out of my hands.'

'He's gone; isn't he, uncle?' said Mary, coming out of her room.

'Yes, my dear; he's gone, poor fellow.'

'He may be a poor fellow, uncle; but he's a very disagreeable inmate in
a house. I have not had any dinner these two days.'

'And I haven't had what can be called a cup of tea since he's been in
the house. But I'll make up for that to-night.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

DE COURCY PRECEPTS AND DE COURCY PRACTICE

There is a mode of novel-writing which used to be much in vogue, but
which has now gone out of fashion. It is, nevertheless, one which is
very expressive when in good hands, and which enables the author to tell
his story, or some portion of his story, with more natural trust than
any other, I mean that of familiar letters. I trust I shall be excused
if I attempt it as regards this one chapter; though, it may be, that I
shall break down and fall into the commonplace narrative, even before
the one chapter be completed. The correspondents are the Lady Amelia De
Courcy and Miss Gresham. I, of course, give precedence to the higher
rank, but the first epistle originated with the latter-named young lady.
Let me hope that they will explain themselves.

'Miss Gresham to Lady Amelia de Courcy

'Greshamsbury House, June 185-

'MY DEAREST AMELIA,

'I wish to consult you on a subject which, as you will
perceive, is of a most momentous nature. You know how much
reliance I place in your judgement and knowledge of what is
proper, and, therefore, I write to you before speaking to any
other living person on the subject: not even to mamma; for,
although her judgement is good too, she has so many cares and
troubles, that it is natural that it should be a little warped
when the interests of her children are involved. Now that it
is all over, I feel that it may possibly have been so in the
case of Mr Moffat.

'You are aware that Mr Mortimer Gazebee is now staying here,
and that he has been here for nearly two months. He is engaged
in managing poor papa's affairs, and mamma, who likes him very
much, says that he is a most excellent man of business. Of
course, you know that he is a junior partner in the very old
firm of Gumption, Gazebee, and Gazebee, who, I understand, do
not undertake any business at all, except what comes to them
from peers, or commoners of the very highest class.

'I soon perceived, dearest Amelia, that Mr Gazebee paid me
more than ordinary attention, and I immediately became very
guarded in my manner. I certainly liked Mr Gazebee from the
first. His manners are quite excellent, his conduct to mamma
is charming, and, as regards myself, I must say that there has
been nothing in his behaviour of which even you could
complain. He has never attempted the slightest familiarity,
and I will do him the justice to say, that, though he has been
very attentive, he has also been very respectful.

'I must confess that, for the last three weeks, I have thought
that he meant something. I might, perhaps, have done more to
repel him; or I might have consulted you earlier as to the
propriety of keeping altogether out of his way. But you know,
Amelia, how often these things lead to nothing, and though I
thought all along that Mr Gazebee was in earnest, I hardly
liked to say anything about it even to you till I was quite
certain. If you had advised me, you know, to accept his offer,
and if, after that, he had never made it, I should have felt
so foolish.

'But now he has made it.  He came to me yesterday just before
dinner, in the little drawing-room, and told me, in the most
delicate manner, in words that even you could not have but
approved, that his highest ambition was to be thought worthy
of my regard, and that he felt for me the warmest love, and
the most profound admiration, and the deepest respect. You may
say, Amelia, that he is only an attorney, and I believe that
he is an attorney; but I am sure you would have esteemed him
had you heard the very delicate way in which he expressed his
sentiments.

'Something had given me a presentiment of what he was going to
do when I saw him come into the room, so that I was on my
guard. I tried very hard to show no emotion; but I suppose I
was a little flurried, as I once detected myself calling him
Mr Mortimer: his name, you know, is Mortimer Gazebee. I ought
not to have done so, certainly; but it was not so bad as if I
had called him Mortimer without the Mr, was it? I don't think
there could possibly be a prettier Christian name than
Mortimer. Well, Amelia, I allowed him to express himself
without interruption. He once attempted to take my hand; but
even this was done without any assumption of familiarity; and
when he saw that I would not permit it, he drew back, and
fixed his eyes on the ground as though he were ashamed even of
that.

'Of course, I had to give him an answer; and though I had
expected that something of this sort would take place, I had
not made up my mind on the subject. I would not, certainly,
under any circumstances, accept him without consulting you. If
I really disliked him, of course there would be no doubt; but
I can't say, dearest Amelia, that I do absolutely dislike him;
and I really think that we would make each other very happy,
if the marriage were suitable as regarded both our positions.

'I collected myself as well as I could, and I really do think
that you would have said that I did not behave badly, though
the position was rather trying. I told him that, of course, I
was flattered by his sentiments, though much surprised at
hearing them; that since I knew him, I had esteemed and valued
him as an acquaintance, but that, looking on him as a man of
business, I had never expected anything more. I then
endeavoured to explain to him, that I was not perhaps
privileged as some other girls might be, to indulge my
feelings altogether: perhaps that was saying too much, and
might make him think that I was in love with him; but, from
the way I said it, I don't think he would, for I was very much
guarded in my manner, and very collected; and then I told him,
that in any proposal of marriage that might be made to me, it
would be my duty to consult my family as much, if not more
than myself.

'He said, of course; and asked whether he might speak to papa.
I tried to make him understand, that in talking of my family,
I did not exactly mean papa, or even mamma. Of course I was
thinking what was due to the name of Gresham. I know very well
what papa would say. He would give his consent in half a
minute; he is so broken-hearted by these debts. And, to tell
you the truth, Amelia, I think mamma would too. He did not
seem quite to comprehend what I meant; but he did say that he
knew it was a high ambition to marry into the family of the
Greshams. I am sure you would confess that he has the most
proper feelings; and as for expressing them no man could do it
better.

'He owned that it was ambition to ally himself with a family
above his own rank in life, and that he looked to doing so as
a means of advancing himself. Now this was at any rate honest.
That was one of his motives, he said; though, of course, not
his first: and then he declared how truly he was attached to
me. In answer to this, I remarked that he had known me only a
very short time. This, perhaps, was giving him too much
encouragement; but, at that moment, I hardly knew what to say,
for I did not wish to hurt his feelings. He then spoke of his
income. He has fifteen hundred a year from the business, and
that will be greatly increased when his father leaves it; and
his father is much older then Mr Gumption, though he is only a
second partner. Mortimer Gazebee will be the senior partner
himself before very long; and perhaps that does alter his
position a little.

'He has a very nice place down somewhere in Surrey; I have
mamma say it quite a gentleman's place. It is let now; but he
will live there when he is married. And he has property of his
own besides which he can settle. So, you see, he is quite as
well off as Mr Oriel; better, indeed; and if a man is in a
profession, I believe it is considered that it does not matter
much what. Of course, a clergyman can be a bishop; but then, I
think I have heard that one attorney did once become Lord
Chancellor. I should have my carriage, you know; I remember
his saying that, especially, though I cannot recollect how he
brought it in.

'I told him, at last, that I was so much taken by surprise
that I could not give him an answer then. He was going up to
London, he said, on the next day, and might he be permitted to
address me on the same subject when he returned? I could not
refuse him, you know; and so now I have taken the opportunity
of his absence to write to you for your advice. You understand
the world so very well, and know exactly what one ought to do
in such a strange position!

'I hope I have made it intelligible, at least, as to what I
have written about. I have said nothing as to my own feelings,
because I wish you to think on the matter without consulting
them. If it would be derogatory to accept Mr Gazebee, I
certainly would not do so because I happen to like him. If we
were to act in that way, what would the world come to, Amelia?
Perhaps my ideas may be overstrained; if so, you will tell me.

'When Mr Oriel proposed to Beatrice, nobody seemed to make any
objection. It all seemed to go as a matter of course. She says
that his family is excellent; but as far as I can learn, his
grandfather was a general in India, and came home very rich.
Mr Gazebee's grandfather was a member of the firm, and so, I
believe, was his great-grandfather. Don't you think this ought
to count for something? Besides, they have no business except
with the most aristocratic persons, such as uncle De Courcy,
and the Marquis of Kensington Gore, and that sort. I mention
the marquis because Mr Mortimer Gazebee is there now. And I
know that one of the Gumptions was once in Parliament; and I
don't think that any of the Oriels ever were. The name of
attorney is certainly very bad, is it not, Amelia? but they
certainly do not seem to be all the same, and I do think that
this ought to make a difference. To hear Mr Mortimer Gazebee
talk of some attorney at Barchester, you would say that there
is quite as much difference between them as between a bishop
and a curate. And so I think there is.

'I don't wish at all to speak of my own feelings; but if he
were not an attorney, he is, I think, the sort of man I should
like. He is very nice in every way, and if you were not told,
I don't think you would know he was an attorney. But, dear
Amelia, I will be guided by you altogether. He is certainly
much nicer than Mr Moffat, and has a great deal more to say
for himself. Of course, Mr Moffat having been in Parliament,
and having been taken up by uncle De Courcy, was in a
different sphere; but I really felt almost relieved when he
behaved in that way. With Mortimer Gazebee, I think it would
be different.

'I shall wait so impatiently for your answer, so do pray write
at once. I hear some people say that these sort of things are
not so much thought of now as they were once, and that all
manner of marriages are considered to be comme il faut. I do
not want, you know, to make myself foolish by being too
particular. Perhaps all these changes are bad, and I rather
think they are; but if the world changes, one must change too;
one can't go against the world.

'So do write and tell me what you think.  Do not suppose that
I dislike the man, for I really cannot say that I do. But I
would not for anything make an alliance for which any one
bearing the name of De Courcy would have to blush.

'Always, dearest Amelia,'
Your most affectionate cousin 
'AUGUSTA GRESHAM.

'PS--I fear Frank is going to be very foolish with Mary Thorne. You 
know it is absolutely important that Frank should marry money.

'It strikes me as quite possible that Mr Mortimer Gazebee may be in
Parliament some of these days.  He is just the man for it.'

Poor Augusta prayed very hard for her husband; but she prayed to a
bosom that on this subject was as hard as a flint, and she prayed in
vain.  Augusta Gresham was twenty-two, Lady Amelia was thirty-four; was
it likely that Lady Amelia would permit Augusta to marry, the issue
having thus been left in her hands? Why should Augusta derogate from
her position by marrying beneath herself, seeing that Lady Amelia had
spent so many more years in the world without having found it necessary
to do so? Augusta's letter was written on two sheets of note-paper,
crossed all over; and Lady Amelia's answer was almost equally
formidable.

'Lady Amelia de Courcy to Miss Augusta Gresham

'Courcy Castle, June, 185-

'MY DEAR AUGUSTA,

'I received your letter yesterday morning, but I have put off
answering it till this evening, as I have wished to give it
very mature consideration. The question is one which concerns,
not only your own character, but happiness for life, and
nothing less than very mature consideration would justify me
in giving a decided opinion on the subject.

'In the first place, I may tell you, that I have not a word to
say against Mr Mortimer Gazebee.' (When Augusta had read as
far as this, her heart sank within her; the rest was all
leather and prunella; she saw at once that the fiat had gone
against her, and that her wish to become Mrs Mortimer Gazebee
was not to be indulged.) 'I have known him for a long time,
and I believe him to be a very respectable person, and I have
no doubt a good man of business. The firm of Messrs Gumption
and Gazebee stands probably quite among the first attorneys in
London, and I know that papa has a very high opinion of them.

'All of these would be excellent arguments to use in favour of
Mr Gazebee as a suitor, had his proposals been made to any one
in his own rank in life. But you, in considering the matter,
should, I think, look on it in a very different light. The
very fact that you pronounce him to be so much superior to
other attorneys, shows in how very low esteem you hold the
profession in general. It shows also, dear Augusta, how well
aware you are that they are a class of people among whom you
should not seek a partner for life.

'My opinion is, that you should make Mr Gazebee understand-
very courteously, of course--that you cannot accept his hand.
You observe that he himself confesses that in marrying you he
would seek a wife in a rank above his own. Is it not,
therefore, clear, that in marrying him, you would descend to a
rank below you own?

'I shall be very sorry if it grieves you; but still it will be
better that you should bear the grief of overcoming a
temporary fancy, than take a step which may so probably make
you unhappy; and which some of your friends would certainly
regard as disgraceful.

'It is not permitted to us, my dear Augusta, to think of
ourselves in such matters. As you truly say, if we were to act
in this way, what would the world come to? It has been God's
pleasure that we should be born with high blood in our veins.
This is a great boon which we both value, but the boon has its
responsibilities as well as its privileges. It is established
by law, that the royal family shall not intermarry with
subjects. In our case there is no law, but the necessity is
not the less felt; we should not intermarry with those who are
probably of a lower rank. Mr Mortimer Gazebee is, after all,
only an attorney; and, although you speak of his
great-grandfather, he is a man of no blood whatsoever. You
must acknowledge that such an admixture should be looked on by
a De Courcy, or even a Gresham, as a pollution.' (Here Augusta
got very red, and she felt almost inclined to be angry with
her cousin.) 'Beatrice's marriage with Mr Oriel is different;
though, remember, I am by no means defending that; it may be
good or bad, and I have had no opportunity of inquiring
respecting Mr Oriel's family. Beatrice, moreover, has never
appeared to me to feel what was due to herself in such
matters; but, as I said, her marriage with Mr Oriel is very
different. Clergymen--particularly the rectors and vicars of
country parishes--do become privileged above other professional
men. I could explain why, but it would be too long in a
letter.

'Your feelings on the subject altogether do you great credit.
I have no doubt that Mr Gresham, if asked, would accede to the
match; but that is just the reason why he should not be asked.
It would not be right that I should say anything against your
father to you; but it is impossible for any of us not to see
that all through life he has thrown away every advantage, and
sacrificed his family. Why is he now in debt, as you say? Why
is he not holding the family seat in Parliament? Even though
you are his daughter, you cannot but feel that you would not
do right to consult him on such a subject.

'As to dear aunt, I feel sure, that were she in good health,
and left to exercise her own judgement, she would not wish to
see you married to the agent for the family estate. For, dear
Augusta, that is the real truth. Mr Gazebee often comes here
in the way of business; and though papa always receives him as
a gentleman--that is, he dines at table and all that--he is not
on the same footing in the house as the ordinary guests and
friends of the family. How would you like to be received at
Courcy Castle in the same way?

'You will say, perhaps, that you would still be papa's niece;
so you would. But you know how strict in such matters papa is,
and you must remember, that the wife always follows the rank
of the husband. Papa is accustomed to the strict etiquette of
a court, and I am sure that no consideration would induce him
to receive the estate-agent in the light of a nephew. Indeed,
were you to marry Mr Gazebee, the house to which he belongs
would, I imagine, have to give up the management of the
property.

'Even were Mr Gazebee in Parliament--and I do not see how it is
probable that he should get there--it would not make any
difference. You must remember, dearest, that I never was an
advocate for the Moffat match. I acquiesced in it, because
mamma did so. If I could have had my own way, I would adhere
to all our old prescriptive principles. Neither money nor
position can atone to me for low birth. But the world, alas!
is retrograding; and, according to the new-fangled doctrines
of the day, a lady of blood is not disgraced by allying
herself to a man of wealth, and what may be called quasi-
aristocratic position. I wish it were otherwise; but so it is.
And, therefore, the match with Mr Moffat was not disgraceful,
though it could not be regarded as altogether satisfactory.

'But with Mr Gazebee the matter would be altogether different.
He is a man earning his bread; honestly, I dare say, but in a
humble position. You say he is very respectable: I do not
doubt it; and so is Mr Scraggs, the butcher at Courcy. You
see, Augusta, to what such arguments reduce you.

'I dare say he may be nicer than Mr Moffat, in one way.  That
is, he may have more small-talk at his command, and be more
clever in all those little pursuits and amusements which are
valued by ordinary young ladies. But my opinion is, that
neither I nor you would be justified in sacrificing ourselves
for such amusements. We have high duties before us. It may be
that the performance of those duties will prohibit us from
taking a part in the ordinary arena of the feminine world. It
is natural that girls should wish to marry; and, therefore,
those who are weak, take the first that come. Those who have
more judgement, make some sort of selection. But the
strongest-minded are, perhaps, those who are able to forgo
themselves and their own fancies, and to refrain from any
alliance that does not tend to the maintenance of high
principles. Of course, I speak of those who have blood in
their veins. You and I need not dilate as to the conduct of
others.

'I hope what I have said will convince you.  Indeed, I know
that it only requires that you and I should have a little
cousinly talk on this matter to be quite in accord. You must
now remain at Greshamsbury till Mr Gazebee shall return.
Immediately that he does so, seek an interview with him; do
not wait till he asks for it; then tell him, that when he
addressed you, the matter had taken you so much by surprise,
that you were not at the moment able to answer him, with that
decision that the subject demanded. Tell him, that you are
flattered--in saying this, however, you must keep a collected
countenance, and be very cold in your manner--but that family
reasons would forbid you to avail yourself of his offer, even
did no other cause prevent it.

'And then, dear Augusta, come to us here.  I know you will be
a little down-hearted after going through this struggle; but I
will endeavour to inspirit you. When we are both together, you
will feel more sensibly the value of that high position which
you will preserve by rejecting Mr Gazebee, and will regret
less acutely whatever you may lose.

'Your very affectionate cousin, 
'AMELIA DE COURCY.

'PS.--I am greatly grieved about Frank; but I have long feared
that he would do some very silly thing. I have heard lately
that Miss Mary Thorne is not even the legitimate niece of your
Dr Thorne, but is the daughter of some poor creature who was
seduced by the doctor, in Barchester. I do not know how true
this may be, but I think your brother should be put on his
guard: it might do good.'

Poor Augusta!   She was in truth to be pitied, for her efforts were
made with the intention of doing right according to her lights.  For Mr
Moffat she had never cared a straw; and when, therefore, she lost the
piece of gilding for which she had been instructed by her mother to
sell herself, it was impossible to pity her.  But Mr Gazebee she would
have loved with that sort of love which it was in her power to bestow. 
With him she would have been happy, respectable, and contented.

She had her written her letter with great care.  When the offer was
made to her, she could not bring herself to throw Lady Amelia to the
winds and marry the man, as it were, out of her own head.  Lady Amelia
had been the tyrant of her life, and so she strove hard to obtain her
tyrant's permission.  She used all her little cunning in showing that, 
after all, Mr Gazebee was not so very plebeian.  All her little cunning
was utterly worthless.  Lady Amelia's mind was too strong to be caught
with such chaff.  Augusta could not serve God and Mammon.  She must
either be true to the god of her cousin's idolatry, and remain single,
or serve the Mammon of her own inclinations, and marry Mr Gazebee.

When re-folding her cousin's letter, after the first perusal, she did
for a moment think of rebellion.  Could she not be happy at the nice
place in Surrey, having, as she would have, a carriage, even though all
the De Courcys should drop her?  It had been put to her that she would
not like to be received at Courcy Castle with the scant civility which
would be considered due to a Mrs Mortimer Gazebee; but what if she 
could put up without being received at Courcy Castle at all? Such ideas
did float through her mind, dimly.

But her courage failed her.  It is so hard to throw off a tyrant; so
much easier to yield, when we have been in the habit of yielding.  This
third letter, therefore, was written; and it is the end of the
correspondence.

'Miss Augusta Gresham to Lady Amelia de Courcy

'Greshamsbury House, July, 185-

'MY DEAREST AMELIA,

'I did not answer your letter before, because I thought it
better to delay doing so till Mr Gazebee had been here. He
came the day before yesterday, and yesterday I did, as nearly
as possible, what you advised. Perhaps, on the whole, it will
be better. As you say, rank has its responsibilities as well
as its privileges.

'I don't quite understand what you mean about clergymen, but
we can talk that over when we meet. Indeed, it seems to me
that if one is to be particular about family--and I am sure I
think we ought--one ought to be so without exception. If Mr
Oriel be a parvenu, Beatrice's children won't be well born
merely because their father was a clergyman, even though he is
a rector. Since my former letter, I have heard that Mr
Gazebee's great-great-great-grandfather established the firm;
and there are many people who were nobodies then who are
thought to have good blood in their veins now.

'But I do not say this because I differ from you.  I agree
with you so fully, that I at once made up my mind to reject
the man; and, consequently, I have done so.

'When I told him I could not accept him from family
considerations, he asked me whether I had spoken to papa. I
told him, no; and that it would be no good, as I had made up
my own mind. I don't think he quite understood me; but it did
not perhaps much matter. You told me to be very cold, and I
think that perhaps he thought me less gracious than before.
Indeed, I fear that when he first spoke, I may seem to have
given him too much encouragement. However, it is all over now;
quite over!' (As Augusta wrote this, she barely managed to
save the paper beneath her hand from being moistened with the
tear which escaped from her eye.)

'I do not mind confessing now,' she continued, 'at any rate to
you, that I did like Mr Gazebee a little. I think his temper
and disposition would have suited me. But I am quite satisfied
that I have done right. He tried very hard to make me change
my mind. That is, he said a great many things as to whether I
would not put off my decision. But I was quite firm. I must
say that he behaved very well, and that I really do think he
liked me honestly and truly; but, of course, I could not
sacrifice family considerations on that account.

'Yes, rank has its responsibilities as well as its privileges.
I will remember that. It is necessary to do so, as otherwise
one would be without consolation for what one has to suffer.
For I find that one has to suffer, Amelia. I know papa would
have advised me to marry this man; and so, I dare say, mamma
would, and Frank, and Beatrice, if they knew that I liked him.
It would not be so bad if we all thought alike about it; but
it is hard to have responsibilities all on one's own shoulder;
is it not?

'But I will go over to you, and you will comfort me.  I always
feel stronger on this subject at Courcy than at Greshamsbury.
We will have a long talk about it, and then I shall be happy
again. I purpose going on next Friday, if that will suit you
and dear aunt. I have told mamma that you all wanted me, and
she made no objection. Do write at once, dearest Amelia, for
to hear from you now will be my only comfort.

'Yours, ever most affectionately and obliged, 
'AUGUSTA GRESHAM.

'PS.--I told mamma what you said about Mary Thorne, and she
said, "Yes; I suppose all the world knows it now; and if all
the world did know it, it makes no difference to Frank." She
seemed very angry; so you see it was true.'

Though, by so doing, we shall somewhat anticipate the end of our story,
it may be desirable that the full tale of Mr Gazebee's loves should be
told here. When Mary is breaking her heart on her death-bed in the last
chapter, or otherwise accomplishing her destiny, we shall hardly find a
fit opportunity of saying much about Mr Gazebee and his aristocratic
bride.

For he did succeed at last in obtaining a bride in whose veins ran the
noble De Courcy blood, in spite of the high doctrine preached so
eloquently by the Lady Amelia. As Augusta had truly said, he had failed
to understand her. He was led to think, by her manner of receiving his
first proposal--and justly so, enough--that she liked him, and would
accept him; and he was therefore rather perplexed by his second
interview. He tried again and again, and begged permission to mention
the matter to Mr Gresham; but Augusta was very firm, and he at last
retired in disgust. Augusta went to Courcy Castle, and received from her
cousin that consolation and re-strengthening which she so much required.

Four years afterwards--long after the fate of Mary Thorne had fallen,
like a thunderbolt, on the inhabitants of Greshamsbury; when Beatrice
was preparing for her second baby, and each of the twins had her
accepted lover--Mr Mortimer Gazebee went down to Courcy Castle; of
course, on a matter of business. No doubt he dined at the table, and all
that. We have the word of Lady Amelia, that the earl, with his usual
good-nature, allowed him such privileges. Let us hope that he never
encroached on them.

But on this occasion, Mr Gazebee stayed a long time at the castle, and
singular rumours as to the cause of his prolonged visit became current
in the little town. No female scion of the present family of Courcy had,
as yet, found a mate. We may imagine that eagles find it difficult to
pair when they become scarce in their localities; and we all know how
hard it has sometimes been to get comme il faut husbands when there has
been any number of Protestant princesses on hand.

Some little difficulty had, doubtless, brought it about that the
countess was still surrounded by her full bevy of maidens. Rank has its
responsibilities as well as its privileges, and these young ladies'
responsibilities seemed to have consisted in rejecting any suitor who
may have hitherto kneeled to them. But now it was told through Courcy,
that one suitor had kneeled, and not in vain; from Courcy the rumour
flew to Barchester, and thence came down to Greshamsbury, startling the
inhabitants, and making one poor heart throb with a violence that would
have been piteous had it been known. The suitor, so named, as Mr
Mortimer Gazebee.

Yes; Mr Mortimer Gazebee had now awarded to him many other privileges
than those of dining at the table, and all that. He rode with the young
ladies in the park, and they all talked to him very familiarly before
company; all except Lady Amelia. The countess even called him Mortimer,
and treated him quite as one of the family.

At last came a letter from the countess to her dear sister Arabella. It
should be given at length, but that I fear to introduce another epistle.
It is such an easy mode of writing, and facility is always dangerous. In
this letter it was announced with much preliminary ambiguity, that
Mortimer Gazebee--who had been found to be a treasure in every way;
quite a paragon of men--was about to be taken into the De Courcy bosom
as a child of that house. On that day fortnight, he was destined to lead
to the altar--the Lady Amelia.

The countess then went on to say, that dear Amelia did not write
herself, being so much engaged by her coming duties--the
responsibilities of which she doubtless fully realized, as well as the
privileges; but she had begged her mother to request that the twins
should come and act as bridesmaids on the occasion. Dear Augusta, she
knew, was too much occupied in the coming event in Mr Oriel's family to
be able to attend.

Mr Mortimer Gazebee was taken into the De Courcy family, and did lead
the Lady Amelia to the altar; and the Gresham twins did go there and act
as bridesmaids. And, which is much more to say for human nature, Augusta
did forgive her cousin, and, after a certain interval, went on a visit
to that nice place in Surrey which she had hoped would be her own home.
It would have been a very nice place, Augusta thought, had not Lady
Amelia Gazebee been so very economical.

We must presume that there was some explanation between them. If so,
Augusta yielded to it, and confessed it to be satisfactory. She had
always yielded to her cousin, and loved her with that sort of love which
is begotten between fear and respect. Anything was better than
quarrelling with her cousin Amelia.

And Mr Mortimer Gazebee did not altogether make a bad bargain. He never
received a shilling of dowry, but that he had not expected. Nor did he
want it. His troubles arose from the overstrained economy of his noble
wife. She would have it, that as she had married a poor man--Mr Gazebee,
however, was not a poor man--it behoved her to manage her house with
great care. Such a match as that she had made--this she told in
confidence to Augusta--had its responsibilities as well as its
privileges.

But, on the whole, Mr Gazebee did not repent his bargain; when he asked
his friends to dine, he could tell them that Lady Amelia would be glad
to see them; his marriage gave him some eclat at his club, and some
additional weight in the firm to which he belonged; he gets his share of
the Courcy shooting, and is asked about to Greshamsbury, and other
Barsetshire houses, not only 'to dine at table and all that', but to
take his part in whatever delights country society there has to offer.
He lives with the great hope that his noble father-in-law may some day
be able to bring him into Parliament.



CHAPTER XXXIX

WHAT THE WORLD SAYS ABOUT BLOOD

'Beatrice,' said Frank, rushing suddenly into his sister's room, 'I want
you to do me one especial favour.' This was three or four days after he
had spoken to Mary Thorne. Since that time he had spoken to none of his
family on the subject; but he was only postponing from day to day the
task of telling his father. He had now completed his round of visits to
the kennel, master huntsman, and stables of the county hunt, and was at
liberty to attend to his own affairs. So he had decided on speaking to
the squire that very day; but he first made his request to his sister.

'I want you to do me one especial favour.'  The day for Beatrice's
marriage had now been fixed, and it was not to be very distant. Mr Oriel
had urged that their honeymoon trip would lose half its delights if they
did not take advantage of the fine weather; and Beatrice had nothing to
allege in answer. The day had just been fixed, and when Frank ran into
her room with his special request, she was not in a humour to refuse him
anything.

'If you wish me to be at your wedding, you must do it.'

'Wish you to be there!  You must be there, of course.  Oh, Frank!  what
do you mean? I'll do anything you ask; if it is not to go to the moon,
or anything of that sort.'

Frank was too much in earnest to joke.  'You must have Mary for one of
your bridesmaids,' he said. 'Now, mind; there may be some difficulty,
but you must insist on it. I know what has been going on; but it is not
to be borne that she should be excluded on such a day as that. You that
have been like sisters all your lives till a year ago.'

'But, Frank--'

'Now, Beatrice, don't have any buts; say that you will do it, and it
will be done: I am sure Oriel will approve, and so will my father.'

'But, Frank, you won't hear me.'

'Not if you make objections; I have set my heart on your doing it.'

'But I had set my heart on the same thing.'

'Well?'

'And I went to Mary on purpose; and told her just as you tell me now,
that she must come. I meant to make mamma understand that I could not be
happy unless it were so; but Mary positively refused.'

'Refused!  What did she say?'

'I could not tell you what she said; indeed, it would not be right if I
could; but she positively declined. She seemed to feel, that after all
that had happened, she never could come to Greshamsbury again.'

'Fiddlestick!'

'But, Frank, those are her feelings; and, to tell the truth, I could not
combat them. I know she is not happy; but time will cure that. And, to
tell you the truth, Frank--'

'It was before I came back that you asked her, was it not?'

'Yes; just the day before you came, I think.'

'Well, it's altered now.  I have seen her since that.'

'Have you Frank?'

'What do you take me for?  Of course, I have.  The very first day I went
to her. And now, Beatrice, you may believe me or not, as you like; but
if I ever marry, I shall marry Mary Thorne; and if she ever marries, I
think she may marry me. At any rate, I have her promise. And now, you
cannot be surprised that I should wish her to be at your wedding; or
that I should declare, that if she is absent, I will be absent. I don't
want any secrets, and you may tell my mother if you like it--and all the
De Courcys too, for anything I care.'

Frank had ever been used to command his sisters: and they, especially
Beatrice, had ever been used to obey. On this occasion, she was well
inclined to do so, if she only knew how. She again remembered how Mary
had once sworn to be at her wedding, to be near her, and to touch
her--even though all the blood of the De Courcys should be crowded
before the altar railings.

'I should be happy that she should be there; but what am I to do, Frank,
if she refuses? I have asked her, and she has refused.'

'Go to her again; you need not have any scruples with her.  Do not I
tell you she will be your sister? Not come here again to Greshamsbury!
Why, I tell you that she will be living here while you are living there
at the parsonage, for years and years to come.'

Beatrice promised that she would go to Mary again, and that she would
endeavour to talk her mother over if Mary would consent to come. But she
could not yet make herself believe that Mary Thorne would ever be
mistress of Greshamsbury. It was so indispensably necessary that Frank
should marry money! Besides, what were these horrid rumours which were
now becoming rife as to Mary's birth; rumours more horrid than any which
had yet been heard.

Augusta had said hardly more than the truth when she spoke of her father
being broken-hearted by his debts. His troubles were becoming almost too
many for him; and Mr Gazebee, though no doubt he was an excellent man of
business, did not seem to lessen them. Mr Gazebee, indeed, was
continually pointing out how much he owed, and in what a quagmire of
difficulties he had entangled himself. Now, to do Mr Umbleby justice, he
had never made himself disagreeable in this manner.

Mr Gazebee had been doubtless right, when he declared that Sir Louis
Scatcherd had not himself the power to take any steps hostile to the
squire; but Sir Louis had also been right, when he boasted that, in
spite of his father's will, he could cause others to move in the matter.
Others did move, and were moving, and it began to be understood that a
moiety, at least, of the remaining Greshamsbury property must be sold.
Even this, however, would by no means leave the squire in undisturbed
possession of the other moiety. And thus, Mr Gresham was nearly
broken-hearted.

Frank had now been at home a week, and his father had not as yet spoken
to him about the family troubles; nor had a word as yet been said
between them as to Mary Thorne. It had been agreed that Frank should go
away for twelve months, in order that he might forget her. He had been
away the twelvemonth, and had now returned, not having forgotten her.

It generally happens, that in every household, one subject of importance
occupies it at a time. The subject of importance now mostly thought of
in the Greshamsbury household, was the marriage of Beatrice. Lady
Arabella had to supply the trousseau for her daughter; the squire had to
supply the money for the trousseau; Mr Gazebee had the task of obtaining
the money for the squire. While this was going on, Mr Gresham was not
anxious to talk to his son, either about his own debts or his son's
love. There would be time for these things when the marriage-feast was
over.

So thought the father, but the matter was precipitated by Frank.  He
also had put off the declaration which he had to make, partly from a
wish to spare the squire, but partly also with a view to spare himself.
We have all some of that cowardice which induces us to postpone an
inevitably evil day. At this time the discussions as to Beatrice's
wedding were frequent in the house, and at one of them Frank had heard
his mother repeat the names of the proposed bridesmaids. Mary's name was
not among them, and hence had arisen the attack on his sister.

Lady Arabella had had her reason for naming the list before her son; but
she overshot her mark. She wished to show him how Mary was forgotten at
Greshamsbury; but she only inspired him with a resolve that she should
not be forgotten. He accordingly went to his sister; and then, the
subject being full on his mind, he resolved at once to discuss it with
his father.

'Sir, are you at leisure for five minutes?' he said, entering the room
in which the squire was accustomed to sit majestically, to receive his
tenants, scold his dependants, and in which, in former happy days, he
had always arranged the meets of the Barsetshire hunt.

Mr Gresham was quite at leisure: when was he not so?  But had he been
immersed in the deepest business of which he was capable, he would
gladly have put it aside at his son's instance.

'I don't like to have any secret from you, sir,' said Frank; 'nor, for
the matter of that, from anybody else'--the anybody else was intended to
have reference to his mother--'and, therefore, I would rather tell you
at once what I have made up my mind to do.'

Frank's address was very abrupt, and he felt it was so.  He was rather
red in the face, and his manner was fluttered. He had quite made up his
mind to break the whole affair to his father; but he had hardly made up
his mind as to the best mode of doing so.

'Good heavens, Frank!  what do you mean?  you are not going to do
anything rash? What is it you mean, Frank?'

'I don't think it is rash,' said Frank.

'Sit down, my boy; sit down.  What is it that you say you are going to
do?'

'Nothing immediately, sir,' said he, rather abashed; 'but as I have made
up my mind about Mary Thorne--'

'Oh, about Mary,' said the squire, almost relieved.

And then Frank, in voluble language, which he hardly, however, had quite
under his command, told his father all that had passed between him and
Mary. 'You see, sir,' said he, 'that it is fixed now, and cannot be
altered. Nor must it be a