ltered. You asked me to go away for twelve
months, and I have done so. It has made no difference, you see. As to
our means of living, I am quite willing to do anything that may be best
and most prudent. I was thinking, sir, of taking a farm somewhere near
here, and living on that.'

The squire sat quite silent for some moments after this communication
had been made to him. Frank's conduct, as a son, in this special matter
of his love, how was it possible for him to find fault? He himself was
almost as fond of Mary as of a daughter; and, though he too would have
been desirous that his son should receive the estate from its
embarrassment by a rich marriage, he did not at all share Lady
Arabella's feelings on the subject. No Countess de Courcy had ever
engraved it on the tablets of his mind that the world would come to ruin
if Frank did not marry money. Ruin there was, and would be, but it had
been brought about by no sin of Frank's.

'Do you remember about her birth, Frank?' he said, at last.

'Yes, sir; everything.  She told me all she knew; and Dr Thorne finished
the story.'

'And what do you think of it?'

'It is a pity and a misfortune.  It might, perhaps, have been a reason
why you or my mother should not have had Mary in the house many years
ago; but it cannot make any difference now.'

Frank had not meant to lean so heavily on his father; but he did so. The
story had never been told to Lady Arabella; was not even known to her
now, positively, and on good authority. But Mr Gresham had always known
it. If Mary's birth was so great a stain upon her, why had he brought
her into his house among his children?

'It is a misfortune, Frank; a very great misfortune.  It will not do for
you and me to ignore birth; too much of the value of one's position
depends on it.'

'But what was Mr Moffat's birth?' said Frank, almost with scorn; 'or
what Miss Dunstable's?' he would have added, had it not been that his
father had not been concerned in that sin of wedding him to the oil of
Lebanon.

'True, Frank.  But yet, what you would mean to say is not true. We must
take the world as we find it. Were you to marry a rich heiress, were her
birth even as low as that of poor Mary--'

'Don't call her poor Mary, father; she is not poor.  My wife will have a
right to take rank in the world, however she was born.'

'Well,--poor in that way.  But were she an heiress, the world would
forgive her birth on account of her wealth.'

'The world is very complaisant, sir.'

'You must take it as you find it, Frank.  I only say that such is the
fact. If Porlock were to marry the daughter of a shoeblack, without a
farthing, he would make a mesalliance; but if the daughter of the
shoeblack had half a million of money, nobody would dream of saying so.
I am stating no opinion of my own: I am only giving you the world's
opinion.'

'I don't give a straw for the world.'

'That is a mistake, my boy; you do care for it, and would be very
foolish if you did not. What you mean is, that, on this particular
point, you value your love more than the world's opinion.'

'Well, yes, that is what I mean.'

But the squire, though he had been very lucid in his definition, had not
got nearer to his object; had not even yet ascertained what his own
object was. This marriage would be ruinous to Greshamsbury; and yet,
what was he to say against it, seeing that the ruin had been his fault,
and not his son's?

'You could let me have a farm; could you not, sir?  I was thinking of
about six or seven hundred acres. I suppose it could be managed
somehow?'

'A farm?' said the father, abstractedly.

'Yes, sir.  I must do something for my living.  I should make less of a
mess of that than anything else. Besides, it would take such a time to
be an attorney, or a doctor, or anything of that sort.'

Do something for his living!  And was the heir of Greshamsbury come to
this--the heir and his only son? Whereas, he, the squire, had succeeded
at an earlier age than Frank's to an unembarrassed income of fourteen
thousand pounds a year! The reflection was very hard to bear.

'Yes: I dare say you could have a farm:' and then he threw himself back
in his chair, closing his eyes. Then, after a while, rose again, and
walked hurriedly about the room. 'Frank,' he said, at last, standing
opposite to his son, 'I wonder what you think of me?'

'Think of you, sir?' ejaculated Frank.

'Yes; what do you think of me, for having thus ruined you.  I wonder
whether you hate me?'

Frank, jumping up from his chair, threw his arms round his father's
neck. 'Hate you, sir? How can you speak so cruelly? You know well that I
love you. And, father, do not trouble yourself about the estate for my
sake. I do not care for it; I can be just as happy without it. Let the
girls have what is left, and I will make my own way in the world,
somehow. I will go to Australia; yes, sir, that will be the best. I and
Mary will both go. Nobody will care about her birth there. But, father,
never say, never think, that I do not love you!'

The squire was too much moved to speak at once, so he sat down again and
covered his face with his hands. Frank went on pacing the room, till,
gradually, his first idea recovered possession of his mind, and the
remembrance of his father's grief faded away. 'May I tell Mary,' he said
at last, 'that you consent to our marriage?'

But the squire was not prepared to say this.  He was pledged to his wife
to do all that he could to oppose it; and he himself thought, that if
anything could consummate the family ruin, it would be this marriage.

'I cannot say that, Frank; I cannot say that.  What would you both live
on? It would be madness.'

'We would go to Australia,' answered he, bitterly.  'I have just said
so.'

'Oh, no, my boy; you cannot do that.  You must not throw up the old
place altogether. There is no other one but you, Frank; and we have
lived here now for so many, many years.'

'But if we cannot live here any longer, father?'

'But for this scheme of yours, we might do.  I will give up everything
to you, the management of the estate, the park, all the land we have in
hand, if you will give up this fatal scheme. For, Frank, it is fatal.
You are only twenty-three; why should you be in such a hurry to marry?'

'You married at twenty-one, sir.'

Frank was again severe on his father, unwittingly.  'Yes, I did,' said
Mr Gresham; 'and see what has come of it! Had I waited ten years longer,
how different would everything have been! No, Frank, I cannot consent to
such a marriage; nor will your mother.'

'It is your consent that I ask, sir; and I am asking for nothing but
your consent.'

'It would be sheer madness; madness for you both.  My own Frank, my dear
boy, do not drive me to distraction! Give it up for four years.'

'Four years!'

'Yes; for four years.  I ask it as a personal favour; as an obligation
to myself, in order that we may be saved from ruin; you, your mother,
and sisters, your family name, and the old house. I do not talk about
myself; but were such a marriage to take place, I should be driven to
despair.'

Frank found it very hard to resist his father, who now had hold of his
hand and arm, and was thus half retaining him, and half embracing him.
'Frank, say that you will forget this for four years--say for three
years.'

But Frank would not say so.  To postpone his marriage for four years, or
for three, seemed to him to be tantamount to giving up Mary altogether;
and he would not acknowledge that any one had the right to demand of him
to do that.

'My word is pledged, sir,' he said.

'Pledged!  Pledged to whom?'

'To Miss Thorne.'

'But I will see her, Frank;--and her uncle.  She was always reasonable.
I am sure she will not wish to bring ruin on her old friends at
Greshamsbury.'

'Her old friends at Greshamsbury have done but little lately to deserve
her consideration. She has been treated shamefully. I know it has not
been by you, sir; but I must say so. She has already been treated
shamefully; but I will not treat her falsely.'

'Well, Frank, I can say no more to you.  I have destroyed the estate
which should have been yours, and I have no right to expect you should
regard what I say.'

Frank was greatly distressed.  He had not any feeling of animosity
against his father with reference to the property, and would have done
anything to make the squire understand this, short of giving up his
engagement to Mary. His feeling rather was, that, as each had a case
against the other, they should cry quits; that he should forgive his
father for his bad management, on condition that he himself was to be
forgiven with regard to his determined marriage. Not that he put it
exactly in that shape, even to himself; but could he have unravelled his
own thoughts, he would have found that such was the web on which they
were based.

'Father, I do regard what you say; but you would not have me be false.
Had you doubled the property instead of lessening it, I could not regard
what you say any more.'

'I should be able to speak in a very different tone; I feel that,
Frank.'

'Do not feel it any more, sir; say what you wish, as you would have said
it under any other circumstances; and pray believe this, the idea never
occurs to me, that I have ground for complaint as regards the property;
never. Whatever troubles we may have, do not let that trouble you.'

Soon after this Frank left him.  What more was there that could be said
between them? They could not be of one accord; but even yet it might not
be necessary that they should quarrel. He went out, and roamed by
himself through the grounds, rather more in meditation than was his
wont.

If he did marry, how was he to live?  He talked of a profession; but had
he meant to do as others do, who make their way in professions, he
should have thought of that a year or two ago!--or, rather, have done
more than think of it. He spoke also of a farm, but even that could not
be had in a moment; nor, if it could, would it produce a living. Where
was his capital? Where was his skill? and he might have asked also,
where the industry so necessary for such a trade? He might have set his
father at defiance, and if Mary were equally headstrong with himself, he
might marry her. But, what then?

As he walked slowly about, cutting off the daisies with his stick, he
met Mr Oriel, going up to the house, as was now his custom, to dine
there and spend the evening, close to Beatrice.

'How I envy you, Oriel!' he said.  'What would I not give to have such a
position in the world as yours!'

'Thou shalt not covet a man's house, nor his wife,' said Mr Oriel;
'perhaps it ought to have been added, nor his position.'

'It wouldn't have made much difference.  When a man is tempted, the
Commandments, I believe, do not go for much.'

'Do they not, Frank?  That's a dangerous doctrine; and one which, if you
had my position, you would hardly admit. But what makes you so much out
of sorts? Your own position is generally considered about the best which
the world has to give.'

'Is it?  Then let me tell you that the world has very little to give.
What can I do? Where can I turn? Oriel, if there be an empty, lying
humbug in the world, it is the theory of high birth and pure blood which
some of us endeavour to maintain. Blood, indeed! If my father had been a
baker, I should know by this time where to look for my livelihood. As it
is, I am told of nothing but my blood. Will my blood ever get me half a
crown?'

And then the young democrat walked on again in solitude, leaving Mr
Oriel in doubt as to the exact line of argument which he had meant to
inculcate.



CHAPTER XL

THE TWO DOCTORS CHANGE PATIENTS

Dr Fillgrave still continued his visits to Greshamsbury, for Lady
Arabella had not yet mustered the courage necessary for swallowing her
pride and sending once more for Dr Thorne. Nothing pleased Dr Fillgrave
more than those visits.

He habitually attended grander families, and richer people; but then, he
had attended them habitually. Greshamsbury was a prize taken from the
enemy; it was his rock of Gibraltar, of which he thought much more than
of any ordinary Hampshire or Wiltshire which had always been within his
own kingdom.

He was just starting one morning with his post-horses for Greshamsbury,
when an impudent-looking groom, with a crooked nose, trotted up to his
door. For Joe still had a crooked nose, all the doctor's care having
been inefficacious to remedy the evil effects of Bridget's little tap
with the rolling-pin. Joe had no written credentials, for his master was
hardly equal to writing, and Lady Scatcherd had declined to put herself
to further personal communication with Dr Fillgrave; but he had
effrontery enough to deliver any message.

'Be you Dr Fillgrave?' said Joe, with one finger just raised to his
cocked hat.

'Yes,' said Dr Fillgrave, with one foot on the step of the carriage, but
pausing at the sight of the well-turned-out servant. 'Yes; I am Dr
Fillgrave.'

'Then you be to go to Boxall Hill immediately; before anywhere else.'

'Boxall Hill!' said the doctor, with a very angry frown.

'Yes; Boxall Hill: my master's place--my master is Sir Louis Scatcherd,
baronet. You've heard of him, I suppose?'

Dr Fillgrave had not his mind quite ready for such an occasion. So he
withdrew his foot from the carriage step, and rubbing his hands one over
another, looked at his own hall door for inspiration. A single glance at
his face was sufficient to show that no ordinary thoughts were being
turned over within his breast.

'Well!' said Joe, thinking that his master's name had not altogether
produced the magic effect which he had expected; remembering, also, now
submissive Greyson had always been, who, being a London doctor, must be
supposed to be a bigger man than this provincial fellow. 'Do you know my
master is dying, very like, while you stand here?'

'What is your master's disease?' said the doctor, facing Joe, slowly,
and still rubbing his hands. 'What ails him? What is the matter with
him?'

'Oh; the matter with him?  Well, to say it out at once then, he do take
a drop too much at times, and then he has the horrors--what is it they
call it? Delicious beam-ends, or something of that sort.'

'Ah, ah, yes; I know; and tell me, my man, who is attending him?'

'Attending him?  why, I do, and his mother, that is, her ladyship.'

'Yes; but what medical attendant: what doctor?'

'Why, there was Greyson, in London, and--'

'Greyson!' and the doctor looked as though a name so medicinally humble
had never struck the tympanum of his ear.

'Yes; Greyson.  And then, down at what's a the man of the place, there
was Thorne.'

'Greshamsbury?'

'Yes; Greshamsbury.  But he and Thorne didn't hit it off; and so since
that he has had no one but myself.'

'I will be at Boxall Hill in the course of the morning,' said Dr
Fillgrave; 'or, rather, you may say, that I will be there at once: I
will take it in my way.' And having thus resolved, he gave his orders
that the post-horses should make such a detour as would enable him to
visit Boxall Hill on his road. 'It is impossible,' said he to himself,
'that I should be twice treated in such a manner in the same house.'

He was not, however, altogether in a comfortable frame of mind as he was
driven up to the hall door. He could not but remember the smile of
triumph with which his enemy had regarded him in that hall; he could not
but think how he had returned fee-less to Barchester, and how little he
had gained in the medical world by rejecting Lady Scatcherd's bank-note.
However, he also had had his triumphs since that. He had smiled
scornfully at Dr Thorne when he had seen him in the Greshamsbury street;
and had been able to tell, at twenty houses through the county, how Lady
Arabella had at last been obliged to place herself in his hands. And he
triumphed again when he found himself really standing by Sir Louis
Scatcherd's bedside. As for Lady Scatcherd, she did not even show
herself. She kept in her own little room, sending out Hannah to ask him
up the stairs; and she only just got a peep at him through the door as
she heard the medical creak of his shoes as he again descended.

We need say but little of his visit to Sir Louis.  It mattered nothing
now, whether it was Thorne, or Greyson, or Fillgrave. And Dr Fillgrave
knew that it mattered nothing: he had skill at least for that--and heart
enough also to feel that he would fain have been relieved from this
task; would fain have left the patient in the hands even of Dr Thorne.

The name which Joe had given to his master's illness was certainly not a
false one. He did find Sir Louis 'in the horrors'. If any father have a
son whose besetting sin was a passion for alcohol, let him take his
child to the room of a drunkard when possessed by 'the horrors'. Nothing
will cure him if not that.

I will not disgust my reader by attempting to describe the poor wretch
in his misery: the sunken, but yet glaring eyes; the emaciated cheeks;
the fallen mouth; the parched, sore lips; the face, now dry and hot, and
then suddenly clammy with drops of perspiration; the shaking hand, and
all but palsied limbs; and worse than this, the fearful mental efforts,
and the struggles for drink; struggles to which it is often necessary to
give way.

Dr Fillgrave soon knew what was to be the man's fate; but he did what he
might to relieve it. There, in one big, best bedroom, looking out to the
north, lay Sir Louis Scatcherd, dying wretchedly. There, in the other
big, best bedroom, looking out to the south, had died the other baronet
about twelvemonth since, and each a victim of the same sin. To this had
come the prosperity of the house of Scatcherd!

And then Dr Fillgrave went on to Greshamsbury.  It was a long day's
work, both for himself and the horses; but then, the triumph of being
dragged up that avenue compensated for both the expense and the labour.
He always put on his sweetest smile as he came near the hall door, and
rubbed his hands in the most complaisant manner of which he knew. It was
seldom that he saw any of the family but Lady Arabella; but then he
desired to see none other, and when he left her in a good humour, was
quite content to take his glass of sherry and eat his lunch by himself.

On this occasion, however, the servant at once asked him to go into the
dining-room, and there he found himself in the presence of Frank
Gresham. The fact was, that Lady Arabella, having at last decided, had
sent for Dr Thorne; and it had become necessary that some one should be
entrusted with the duty of informing Dr Fillgrave. That some one must be
the squire, or Frank. Lady Arabella would doubtless have preferred a
messenger more absolutely friendly to her own side of the house; but
such messenger there was none: she could not send Mr Gazebee to see the
doctor, and so, of the two evils, she chose the least.

'Dr Fillgrave,' said Frank, shaking hands with him very cordially as he
came up, 'my mother is so much obliged to you for all your care and
anxiety on her behalf! and, so indeed, are we all.'

The doctor shook hands with him very warmly.  This little expression of
a family feeling on his behalf was the more gratifying, as he had always
thought that the males of the Greshamsbury family were still wedded to
that pseudo-doctor, that half-apothecary who lived in the village.

'It has been awfully troublesome to you, coming over all this way, I am
sure. Indeed, money could not pay for it; my mother feels that. It must
cut up your time so much.'

'Not at all, Mr Gresham; not at all,' said the Barchester doctor, rising
up on his toes proudly as he spoke. 'A person of your mother's
importance, you know! I should be happy to go any distance to see her.'

'Ah!  but, Dr Fillgrave, we cannot allow that.'

'Mr Gresham, don't mention it.'

'Oh, yes; but I must,' said Frank, who thought that he had done enough
for civility, and was now anxious to come to the point. 'The fact is,
doctor, that we are very much obliged for what you have done; but, for
the future, my mother thinks that she can trust to such assistance as
she can get here in the village.'

Frank had been particularly instructed to be very careful how he
mentioned Dr Thorne's name, and, therefore, cleverly avoided it.'

Get what assistance she wanted in the village!  What words were those
that he heard? 'Mr Gresham, eh--hem--perhaps I do not completely--' Yes,
alas! he had completely understood what Frank had meant that he should
understand. Frank desired to be civil, but he had no idea of beating
unnecessarily about the bush on such an occasion as this.

'It's by Sir Omicron's advice, Dr Fillgrave.  You see, this man
here'--and he nodded his head towards the doctor's house, being still
anxious not to pronounce the hideous name--'has known my mother's
constitution for so many years.'

'Oh, Mr Gresham; of course, if it is wished.'

'Yes, Dr Fillgrave, it is wished.  Lunch is coming directly:' and Frank
rang the bell.

'Nothing, I thank you, Mr Gresham.'

'Do take a glass of sherry.'

'Nothing at all, I am very much obliged to you.'

'Won't you let the horses get some oats?'

'I will return at once, if you please, Mr Gresham.'  And the doctor did
return, taking with him, on this occasion, the fee that was offered to
him. His experience had at any rate taught him so much.

But though Frank could do this for Lady Arabella, he could not receive
Dr Thorne on her behalf. The bitterness of that interview had to be
borne by herself. A messenger had been sent for him, and he was upstairs
with her ladyship while his rival was receiving his conge downstairs.
She had two objects to accomplish, if it might be possible: she had
found that high words with the doctor were of no avail; but it might be
possible that Frank could be saved by humiliation on her part. If she
humbled herself before this man, would he consent to acknowledge that
his niece was not the fit bride for the heir of Greshamsbury?

The doctor entered the room where she was lying on her sofa, and walking
up to her with a gentle, but yet not constrained step, took the seat
beside her little table, just as he had always been accustomed to do,
and as though there had been no break in the intercourse.

'Well, doctor, you see that I have come back to you,' she said, with a
faint smile.

'Or, rather I have come back to you.  And, believe me, Lady Arabella, I
am very happy to do so. There need be no excuses. You were, doubtless,
right to try what other skill could do; and I hope it has not been tried
in vain.'

She had meant to have been so condescending; but now all that was put
quite beyond her power. It was not easy to be condescending to the
doctor: she had been trying all her life, and had never succeeded.

'I have had Sir Omicron Pie,' she said.

'So I was glad to hear.  Sir Omicron is a clever man, and has a good
name. I always recommend Sir Omicron myself.'

'And Sir Omicron returns the compliment,' said she, smiling gracefully,
'for he recommends you. He told Mr Gresham that I was very foolish to
quarrel with my best friend. So now we are friends again, are we not?
You see how selfish I am.' And she put out her hand to him.

The doctor took her hand cordially, and assured her that he bore her no
ill-will; that he fully understood her conduct--and that he had never
accused her of selfishness. This was all very well and very gracious;
but, nevertheless, Lady Arabella felt that the doctor kept the upper
hand in those sweet forgivenesses. Whereas, she had intended to keep the
upper hand, at least for a while, so that her humiliation might be more
effective when it did come.

And then the doctor used his surgical lore, as he well knew how to use
it. There was an assured confidence about him, an air which seemed to
declare that he really knew what he was doing. These were very
comfortable to his patients, but they were wanting in Dr Fillgrave. When
he had completed his examinations and questions, and she had completed
her little details and made her answer, she was certainly more at ease
than she had been since the doctor had last left her.

'Don't go yet, for a moment,' she said.  'I have one word to say to
you.'

He declared that he was not in the least in a hurry.  He desired nothing
better, he said, than to sit there and talk to her. 'And I owe you a
most sincere apology, Lady Arabella.'

'A sincere apology!' said she, becoming a little red.  Was he going to
say anything about Mary? Was he going to own that he, and Mary, and
Frank had all been wrong?

'Yes, indeed.  I ought not to have brought Sir Louis Scatcherd here: I
ought to have known that he would have disgraced himself.'

'Oh!  it does not signify,' said her ladyship in a tone almost of
disappointment. 'I had forgotten it. Mr Gresham and you had more
inconvenience than we had.'

'He is an unfortunate, wretched man--most unfortunate; with an immense
fortune which he can never live to possess.'

'And who will the money go to, doctor?'

This was a question for which Dr Thorne was hardly prepared. 'Go to?' he
repeated. 'Oh, some member of the family, I believe. There are plenty of
nephews and nieces.'

'Yes; but will it be divided, or all go to one?'

'Probably to one, I think.  Sir Roger had a strong idea of leaving it
all in one hand.' If it should happen to be a girl, thought Lady
Arabella, what an excellent opportunity would that be for Frank to marry
money!

'And now, doctor, I want to say one word to you; considering the very
long time that we have known each other, it is better that I should be
open with you. This estrangement between us and dear Mary has given us
all so much pain. Cannot we do anything to put an end to it?'

'Well, what can I say, Lady Arabella?  That depends so wholly on
yourself.'

'If it depends on me, it shall be done at once.'

The doctor bowed.  And though he could hardly be said to do so stiffly,
he did it coldly. His bow seemed to say, 'Certainly; if you choose to
make a proper amende it can be done. But I think it is very unlikely
that you will do so.'

'Beatrice is just going to be married, you know that, doctor.'  The
doctor said that he did know it. 'And it will be so pleasant that Mary
should make one of us. Poor Beatrice; you don't know what she has
suffered.'

'Yes,' said the doctor, 'there has been suffering, I am sure; suffering
on both sides.'

'You cannot wonder that we should be so anxious about Frank, Dr Thorne;
an only son, and the heir to an estate that has been so very long in the
family:' and Lady Arabella put her handkerchief to her eyes, as though
these facts were themselves melancholy, and not to be thought of by a
mother without some soft tears. 'Now I wish you could tell me what your
views are, in a friendly manner, between ourselves. You won't find me
unreasonable.'

'My views, Lady Arabella?'

'Yes, doctor; about your niece, you know: you must have views of some
sort; that's of course. It occurs to me, that perhaps were all in the
dark together. If so, a little candid speaking between you and me may
set it all right.'

Lady Arabella's career had not hitherto been conspicuous for candour, as
far as Dr Thorne had been able to judge of it; but that was no reason
why he should not respond to so very becoming an invitation on her part.
He had no objection to a little candid speaking; at least, so he
declared. As to his views with regard to Mary, they were merely these:
that he would make her as happy and comfortable as he could while she
remained with him; and that he would give her his blessing--for he had
nothing else to give her--when she left him;--if ever she should do so.

Now, it will be said that the doctor was not very candid in this; not
more so, perhaps, than was Lady Arabella herself. But when one is
specially invited to be candid, one is naturally set upon one's guard.
Those who by disposition are most open, are apt to become crafty when so
admonished. When a man says to you, 'Let us be candid with each other,'
you feel instinctively that he desires to squeeze you without giving a
drop of water himself.

'Yes; but about Frank,' said Lady Arabella.

'About Frank!' said the doctor, with an innocent look, which her
ladyship could hardly interpret.

'What I mean is this: can you give me your word that these young people
do not intend to do anything rash? One word like that from you will set
my mind quite at rest. And then we could be so happy together again.'

'Ah!  who is to answer for what rash things a young man will do?' said
the doctor, smiling.

Lady Arabella got up from the sofa, and pushed away the little table.
The man was false, hypocritical, and cunning. Nothing could be made of
him. They were all in a conspiracy together to rob her of her son; to
make him marry without money! What should she do? Where should she turn
for advice and counsel? She had nothing more to say to the doctor; and
he, perceiving that this was the case, took his leave. This little
attempt to achieve candour had not succeeded.

Dr Thorne had answered Lady Arabella as had seemed best to him on the
spur of the moment; but he was by no means satisfied with himself. As he
walked away through the gardens, he bethought himself whether it would
be better for all parties if he could bring himself to be really candid.
Would it not be better for him at once to tell the squire what were the
future prospects of his niece, and let the father agree to the marriage,
or not agree to it, as he might think fit. But then, if so, if he did do
this, would he not in fact say, 'There is my niece, there is this girl
of whom you have been talking for the last twelvemonth, indifferent to
what agony of mind you may have occasioned to her; there she is, a
probable heiress! It may be worth your son's while to wait a little
time, and not cast her off till he shall know whether she be an heiress
or no. If it shall turn out that she is rich, let him take her; if not,
why, he can desert her then as well as now.' He could not bring himself
to put his niece into such a position as this. He was anxious enough
that she should be Frank Gresham's wife, for he loved Frank Gresham; he
was anxious enough, also, that she should give to her husband the means
of saving the property of his family. But Frank, though he might find
her rich, was bound to take her while she was poor.

Then, also, he doubted whether he would be justified in speaking of this
will at all. He almost hated the will for the trouble and vexation it
had given him, and the constant stress it had laid on his conscience. He
had spoken of it as yet to no one, and he thought that he was resolved
not to do so while Sir Louis should yet be in the land of the living.

On reaching home, he found a note from Lady Scatcherd, informing him
that Dr Fillgrave had once more been at Boxall Hill, and that, on this
occasion, he had left the house without anger.

'I don't know what he has said about Louis,' she added, 'for, to tell
the truth, doctor, I was afraid to see him. But he comes again
to-morrow, and then I shall be braver. But I fear that my poor boy is in
a bad way.'



CHAPTER XLI

DOCTOR THORNE WON'T INTERFERE

At this period there was, as it were, a truce to the ordinary little
skirmishes which had been so customary between Lady Arabella and the
squire. Things had so fallen out, that they neither of them had must
spirit for a contest; and, moreover, on that point which at the present
moment was most thought of by both of them, they were strangely in
unison. For each of them was anxious to prevent the threatened marriage
of their only son.

It must, moreover, be remembered, that Lady Arabella had carried a great
point in ousting Mr Yates Umbleby and putting the management of the
estate into the hands of her own partisan. But then the squire had not
done less in getting rid of Fillgrave and reinstating Dr Thorne in
possession of the family invalids. The losses, therefore, had been
equal; the victories equal; and there was a mutual object.

And it must be confessed, also, that Lady Arabella's taste for grandeur
was on the decline. Misfortune was coming too near to her to leave her
much anxiety for the gaieties of a London season. Things were not faring
well with her. When her eldest daughter was going to marry a man of
fortune, and a member of Parliament, she had thought nothing of
demanding a thousand pounds or so for the extraordinary expenses
incident to such an occasion. But now, Beatrice was to become the wife
of a parish parson, and even that was thought to be a fortunate event;
she had, therefore, no heart for splendour.

'The quieter we can do it the better,' she wrote to her countess-sister.
'Her father wanted to give him at least a thousand pounds; but Mr
Gazebee has told me confidentially that it literally cannot be done at
the present moment! Ah, my dear Rosina! how things have been managed! If
one or two of the girls will come over, we shall all take it as a
favour. Beatrice would think it very kind of them. But I don't think of
asking you or Amelia.' Amelia was always the grandest of the De Courcy
family, being almost on an equality with--nay, in some respect superior
to--the countess herself. But this, of course, was before the days of
the place in Surrey.

Such, and so humble being the present temper of the lady of
Greshamsbury, it will not be thought surprising that she and Mr Gresham
should at last come together in their efforts to reclaim their son.

At first Lady Arabella urged upon the squire the duty of being very
peremptory and very angry. 'Do as other fathers do in such cases. Make
him understand that he will have no allowance to live on.' 'He
understands that well enough,' said Mr Gresham.

'Threaten to cut him off with a shilling,' said her ladyship, with
spirit. 'I haven't a shilling to cut him off with,' answered the squire,
bitterly.

But Lady Arabella herself soon perceived, that this line would not do.
As Mr Gresham himself confessed, his own sins against his son had been
to great to allow of his taking a high hand with him. Besides, Mr
Gresham was not a man who could ever be severe with a son whose
individual conduct had been so good as Frank's. This marriage, was, in
his view, a misfortune to be averted if possible,--to be averted by any
possible means; but, as far as Frank was concerned, it was to be
regarded rather as a monomania than a crime.

'I did feel so certain that he would have succeeded with Miss
Dunstable,' said the mother, almost crying.

'I thought it impossible but that at his age a twelvemonth knocking
about the world would cure him,' said the father.

'I never heard of a boy being so obstinate about a girl,' said the
mother. 'I'm sure he didn't get it from the De Courcys:' and then,
again, they talked it over in all its bearings.

'But what are they to live upon?' said Lady Arabella, appealing, as it
were, to some impersonation of reason. 'That's what I want him to tell
me. What are they to live upon?'

'I wonder whether De Courcy could get him into some embassy?' said the
father. 'He does talk of a profession.'

'What!  with the girl and all?' asked Lady Arabella with horror, alarmed
at the idea of such an appeal being made to her noble brother.

'No; but before he marries.  He might be broken of it that way.'

'Nothing will break him,' said the wretched mother; 'nothing--nothing.
For my part, I think that he is possessed. Why was she brought here? Oh,
dear! oh, dear! Why was she ever brought into this house?'

This last question Mr Gresham did not think it necessary to answer. That
evil had been done, and it would be useless to dispute it. 'I'll tell
you what I'll do,' said he. 'I'll speak to the doctor myself.'

'It's not the slightest use,' said Lady Arabella.  'He will not assist
us. Indeed, I firmly believe it's all his own doing.'

'Oh, nonsense!  that really is nonsense, my love.'

'Very well, Mr Gresham.  What I say is always nonsense, I know; you have
always told me so. But yet, see how things have turned out. I knew how
it would be when she was first brought into the house.' This assertion
was rather a stretch on the part of Lady Arabella.

'Well, it is nonsense to say that Frank is in love with the girl at the
doctor's bidding.'

'I think you know, Mr Gresham, that I don't mean that.  What I say is
this, that Dr Thorne, finding what an easy fool Frank is--'

'I don't think he's at all easy, my love; and is certainly not a fool.'

'Very well, have it your own way.  I'll not say a word more. I'm
struggling to do my best, and I'm browbeaten on every side. God knows I
am not in a state of health to bear it!' And Lady Arabella bowed her
head into her pocket-handkerchief.

'I think, my dear, if you were to see Mary herself it might do some
good,' said the squire, when the violence of his wife's grief had
somewhat subsided.

'What!  go and call upon this girl?'

'Yes; you can send Beatrice to give her notice, you know.  She never was
unreasonable, and I do not think that you would find her so. You should
tell her, you know--'

'Oh, I should know very well what to tell her, Mr Gresham.'

'Yes, my love; I'm sure you would; nobody better.  But what I mean is,
that if you are to do any good, you should be kind in your manner. Mary
Thorne has a spirit that you cannot break. You may perhaps lead, but
nobody can drive her.'

As this scheme originated with her husband, Lady Arabella could not, of
course, confess that there was much in it. But, nevertheless, she
determined to attempt it, thinking that if anything could be efficacious
for good in their present misfortunes, it would be her own diplomatic
powers. It was, therefore, at last settled between them, that he should
endeavour to talk over the doctor, and that she would do the same with
Mary.

'And then I will speak to Frank,' said Lady Arabella.  'As yet he has
never had the audacity to open his mouth to me about Mary Thorne, though
I believe he declares his love openly to every one else in the house.'

'And I will get Oriel to speak to him,' said the squire.

'I think Patience might do more good.  I did once think he was getting
fond of Patience, and I was quite unhappy about it then. Ah, dear! I
should be almost pleased at that now.'

And thus it was arranged that all the artillery of Greshamsbury was to
be brought to bear at once on Frank's love, so as to crush it, as it
were, by the very weight of metal.

It may be imagined that the squire would have less scruple in addressing
the doctor on this matter than his wife would feel; and that his part of
their present joint undertaking was less difficult than hers. For he and
the doctor had ever been friends at heart. But, nevertheless, he did
feel much scruple, as, with his stick in hand, he walked down to the
little gate which opened out near the doctor's house.

This feeling was so strong, that he walked on beyond this door to the
entrance, thinking of what he was going to do, and then back again. It
seemed to be his fate to be depending always on the clemency or
consideration of Dr Thorne. At this moment the doctor was imposing the
only obstacle which was offered to the sale of a great part of his
estate. Sir Louis, through his lawyer, was loudly accusing the doctor to
sell, and the lawyer was loudly accusing the doctor of delaying to do
so. 'He has the management of your property,' said Mr Finnie; 'but he
manages it in the interest of his own friend. It is quite clear, and we
will expose it.' 'By all means,' said Sir Louis. 'It is a d--d shame,
and it shall be exposed.'

When he reached the doctor's house, he was shown into the drawing-room,
and found Mary there alone. It had always been the habit to kiss her
forehead when he chanced to meet her about the house at Greshamsbury.
She had been younger and more childish then; but even now she was but a
child to him, so he kissed her as he had been wont to do. She blushed
slightly as she looked up into his face, and said: 'Oh, Mr Gresham, I am
so glad to see you again.'

As he looked at her he could not but acknowledge that it was natural
that Frank should love her. He had never before seen that she was
attractive;--had never had an opinion about it. She had grown up as a
child under his eye; and as she had not had the name of being especially
a pretty child, he had never thought on the subject. Now he saw before
him a woman whose every feature was full of spirit and animation; whose
eye sparkled with more than mere brilliancy; whose face was full of
intelligence; whose very smile was eloquent. Was it to be wondered at
that Frank should have learned to love her?

Miss Thorne wanted but one attribute which many consider essential to
feminine beauty. She had no brilliancy of complexion, no pearly
whiteness, no vivid carnation; nor, indeed, did she possess the dark
brilliance of a brunette. But there was a speaking earnestness in her
face; and expression of mental faculty which the squire now for the
first time perceived to be charming.

And then he knew how good she was.  He knew well what was her nature;
how generous, how open, how affectionate, and yet how proud! Her pride
was her fault; but even that was not a fault in his eyes. Out of his own
family there was no one whom he had loved, and could love, as he loved
her. He felt, and acknowledged, that no man could have a better wife.
And yet he was there with the express object of rescuing his son from
such a marriage!

'You are looking very well, Mary,' he said, almost involuntarily.  'Am
I?' she answered, smiling. 'It's very nice at any rate to be
complimented. Uncle never pays me any compliments of that sort.'

In truth, she was looking well.  She would say to herself over and over
again, from morning to night, that Frank's love for her would be, must
be, unfortunate; could not lead to happiness. But, nevertheless, it did
make her happy. She had before his return made up her mind to be
forgotten, and it was so sweet to find that he had been so far from
forgetting her. A girl may scold a man in words for rashness in his
love, but her heart never scolds him for such an offence as that. She
had not been slighted, and her heart, therefore, still rose buoyant
within her breast.

The doctor entered the room.  As the squire's visit had been expected by
him, he had of course not been out of the house. 'And now I suppose I
must go,' said Mary; 'for I know you are going to talk about business.
But, uncle, Mr Gresham says I'm looking very well. Why have you not been
able to find that out?'

'She's a dear, good girl,' said the squire, as the door shut behind her;
'a dear good girl!' and the doctor could not fail to see that his eyes
were filled with tears.

'I think she is,' said he, quietly.  And then they both sat silent, as
though each was waiting to hear whether the other had anything more to
say on that subject. The doctor, at any rate, had nothing more to say.

'I have come here specially to speak to you about her.'

'About Mary?'

'Yes, doctor; about her and Frank: something must be done, some
arrangement made: if not for our sakes, at least for theirs.'

'What arrangement, squire?'

'Ah! that's the question.  I take it for granted that either Frank or
Mary has told you that they have engaged themselves to each other.'

'Frank told me some twelve months since.'

'And has not Mary told you?'

'Not exactly that.  But, never mind; she has, I believe, no secret from
me. Though I have said but little to her, I think I know it all.'

'Well, what then?'

The doctor shook his head and put up his hands.  He had nothing to say;
no proposition to make; no arrangement to suggest. The thing was so, and
he seemed to say that, as far as he was concerned, there was an end of
it.

The squire sat looking at him, hardly knowing how to proceed. It seemed
to him, that the fact of a young man and a young lady being in love with
each other was not a thing to be left to arrange itself, particularly
seeing the rank in life in which they were placed. But the doctor seemed
to be of a different opinion.

'But, Dr Thorne, there is no man on God's earth who knows my affairs as
well as you do; and in knowing mine, you know Frank's. Do you think it
possible that they should marry each other?'

'Possible; yes, it is possible.  You mean, will it be prudent?'

'Well, take it in that way; would it not be most imprudent?'

'At present, it certainly would be.  I have never spoken to either of
them on the subject; but I presume they do not think of such a thing for
the present.'

'But, doctor--' The squire was certainly taken aback by the coolness of
the doctor's manner. After all, he, the squire, was Mr Gresham of
Greshamsbury, generally acknowledged to be the first commoner in
Barsetshire; after all, Frank was his heir, and, in process of time, he
would be Mr Gresham of Greshamsbury. Crippled as the estate was, there
would be something left, and the rank at any rate remained. But as to
Mary, she was not even the doctor's daughter. She was not only
penniless, but nameless, fatherless, worse than motherless! It was
incredible that Dr Thorne, with his generally exalted ideas as to
family, should speak in this cold way as to a projected marriage between
the heir of Greshamsbury and his brother's bastard child!

'But, doctor,' repeated the squire.

The doctor put one leg over the other, and began to rub his calf.
'Squire,' said he. 'I think I know all that you would say, all that you
mean. And you don't like to say it, because you would not wish to pain
me by alluding to Mary's birth.'

'But, independently of that, what would they live on?' said the squire,
energetically. 'Birth is a great thing, a very great thing. You and I
think exactly the alike about that, so we need have no dispute. You are
quite as proud of Ullathorne as I am of Greshamsbury.'

'I might be if it belonged to me.'

'But you are.  It is no use arguing.  But, putting that aside
altogether, what would they live on? If they were to marry, what would
they do? Where would they go? You know what Lady Arabella thinks of such
things; would it be possible that they should live up at the house with
her? Besides, what a life would that be for both of them! Could they
live here? Would that be well for them?'

The squire looked at the doctor for an answer; but he still went rubbing
his calf. Mr Gresham, therefore, was constrained to continue his
expostulation.

'When I am dead there will still, I hope, be something;--something left
for the poor fellow. Lady Arabella and the girls would be better off,
perhaps, than now, and I sometimes wish, for Frank's sake, that the time
had come.'

The doctor could not now go on rubbing his knees.  He was moved to
speak, and declared that, of all events, that was the one which would be
furthest from Frank's heart. 'I know no son,' said he, 'who loves his
father more dearly than he does.'

'I do believe it,' said the squire; 'I do believe it.  But yet, I cannot
but feel that I am in his way.'

'No, squire, no; you are in no one's way.  You will find yourself happy
with your son yet, and proud of him. And proud of his wife, too. I hope
so, and I think so: I do, indeed, or I should not say so, squire; we
will have many a happy day yet together, when we shall talk of all these
things over the dining-room fire at Greshamsbury.'

The squire felt it kind in the doctor that he should thus endeavour to
comfort him; but he could not understand, and did not inquire, on what
basis these golden hopes was founded. It was necessary, however, to
return to the subject which he had come to discuss. Would the doctor
assist him in preventing this marriage? That was now the one thing
necessary to be kept in view.

'But, doctor, about the young people; of course they cannot marry, you
are aware of that.'

'I don't know that exactly.'

'Well, doctor, I must say I thought you would feel it.'

'Feel what, squire?'

'That, situated as they are, they ought not to marry.'

'That is quite another question.  I have said nothing about that either
to you or to anybody else. The truth is, squire, I have never interfered
in this matter one way or the other; and I have no wish to do so now.'

'But should you not interfere?  Is not Mary the same to you as your own
child?'

Dr Thorne hardly knew how to answer this.  He was aware that his
argument about not interfering was in fact absurd. Mary could not marry
without his interference; and had it been the case that she was in
danger of making an improper marriage, of course he would interfere. His
meaning was, that he would not at the present moment express any
opinion; he would not declare against a match which might turn out to be
in every way desirable; nor, if he spoke in favour of it, could he give
his reasons for doing so. Under these circumstances, he would have
wished to say nothing, could that only have been possible.

But as it was not possible, and as he must say something, he answered
the squire's last question by asking another. 'What is your objection,
squire?'

'Objection!  Why, what on earth would they live on?'

'Then I understand, that if that difficulty were over, you would not
refuse your consent merely because of Mary's birth?'

This was a manner in which the squire had by no means expected to have
the affair presented to him. It seemed so impossible that any
sound-minded man should take any but his view of the case, that he had
not prepared himself for argument. There was every objection to his son
marrying Miss Thorne; but the fact of their having no income between
them did certainly justify him in alleging that first.

'But that difficulty can't be got over, doctor.  You know, however, that
it would be cause of grief to us all to see Frank marry much beneath his
station; that is, I mean, in family. You should not press me to say
this, for you know that I love Mary dearly.'

'But, my dear friend, it is necessary.  Wounds sometimes must be opened
in order that they may be healed. What I mean is this;--and, squire, I'm
sure I need not say to you that I hope for an honest answer,--were Mary
Thorne an heiress; had she, for instance, such wealth as that Miss
Dunstable that we hear of; in that case would you object to this match?'

When the doctor declared that he expected an honest answer the squire
listened with all his ears; but the question, when finished, seemed to
have no bearing on the present case.

'Come, squire, speak your mind faithfully.  There was some talk of
Frank's marrying Miss Dunstable; did you mean to object to that match?'

'Miss Dunstable was legitimate; at least, I presume so.'

'Oh, Mr Gresham!  has it come to that?  Miss Dunstable, then, would have
satisfied your ideas of high birth?'

Mr Gresham was rather posed, and regretted, at the moment, his allusion
to Miss Dunstable's presumed legitimacy. But he soon recovered himself.
'No,' said he, 'it would not. And I am willing to admit, as I have
admitted before, that the undoubted advantages arising from wealth are
taken by the world as atoning for what otherwise would be a mesalliance.
But--'

'You admit that, do you?  You acknowledge that as your conviction on the
subject?'

'Yes.  But--' The squire was going on to explain the propriety of this
opinion, but the doctor uncivilly would not hear him.

'Then squire, I will not interfere in this matter one way or the other.'

'How on earth can such an opinion--'

'Pray excuse me, Mr Gresham; but my mind is now quite made up. It was
very nearly so before. I will do nothing to encourage Frank, nor will I
say anything to discourage Mary.'

'That is the most singular resolution that a man of sense like you ever
came to.'

'I can't help it, squire; it is my resolution.'

'But what has Miss Dunstable's fortune to do with it?'

'I cannot say that it has anything; but, in this matter, I will not
interfere.'

The squire went on for some time, but it was all to no purpose; and at
last he left the house, considerably in dudgeon. The only conclusion to
which he could come was, that Dr Thorne had thought the chance on his
niece's behalf too good to be thrown away, and had, therefore, resolved
to act in a very singular way.

'I would not have believed it of him, though all Barsetshire had told
me,' he said to himself as he entered the great gates; and he went on
repeating the same words till he found himself in his own room. 'No, not
if all Barsetshire had told me!'

He did not, however, communicate the ill result of his visit to the Lady
Arabella.



CHAPTER XLII

WHAT CAN YOU GIVE IN 