RETURN?

In spite of the family troubles, these were happy days for Beatrice. It
so seldom happens that young ladies on the eve of their marriage have
their husbands living near them. This happiness was hers, and Mr Oriel
made the most of it. She was constantly being coaxed down to the
parsonage by Patience, in order that she might give her opinion, in
private, on some domestic arrangement, some piece of furniture, or some
new carpet; but this privacy was always invaded. What Mr Oriel's
parishioners did in these halcyon days, I will not ask. His morning
services, however, had been altogether given up, and he had provided
himself with a very excellent curate.

But one grief did weigh heavily on Beatrice.  She continually heard her
mother say things which made her feel that it would be more than ever
impossible that Mary should be at her wedding; and yet she had promised
her brother to ask her. Frank had also repeated his threat, that if Mary
were not present, he would absent himself.

Beatrice did what most girls do in such a case; what all would do who
are worth anything; she asked her lover's advice.

'Oh!  but Frank can't be in earnest,' said the lover.  'Of course he'll
be at our wedding.'

'You don't know him, Caleb.  He is so changed that no one hardly would
know him. You can't conceive how much in earnest he is, how determined
and resolute. And then, I should like to have Mary so much if mamma
would let her come.'

'Ask Lady Arabella,' said Caleb.

'Well, I suppose I must do that; but I know what she'll say, and Frank
will never believe that I have done my best.' Mr Oriel comforted her
with such little whispered consolations as he was able to afford, and
then she went away on her errand to her mother.

She was indeed surprised at the manner in which her prayer was received.
She could hardly falter forth her petition; but when she had done so,
Lady Arabella answered in this wise:-

'Well my dear, I have no objection, none the least; that is, of course,
if Mary is disposed to behave herself properly.'

'Oh, mamma! of course she will,' said Beatrice; 'she always did and
always does.'

'I hope she will, my love.  But, Beatrice, when I say that I shall be
glad to see her, of course I mean under certain conditions. I never
disliked Mary Thorne, and if she would only let Frank understand that
she will not listen to his mad proposals, I should be delighted to see
her at Greshamsbury just as she used to be.'

Beatrice could say nothing in answer to this; but she felt very sure
that Mary, let her intention be what it might, would not undertake to
make Frank understand anything at anybody's bidding.

'I will tell you what I will do, my dear,' continued Lady Arabella; 'I
will call on Mary myself.'

'What!  at Dr Thorne's house?'

'Yes; why not?   I have been at Dr Thorne's house before now.'  And Lady
Arabella could not but think of her last visit thither, and the strong
feeling she had, as she came out, that she would never again enter those
doors. She was, however, prepared to do anything on behalf of her
rebellious son.

'Oh, yes!   I know that, mamma.'

'I will call upon her, and I can possibly manage it, I will ask her
myself to make one of your party. If so, you can go to her afterwards
and make your own arrangements. Just write her a note, my dear, and say
that I will call to-morrow at twelve. It might fluster her if I were to
go without notice.'

Beatrice did as she was bid, but with a presentiment that no good would
come of it. The note was certainly unnecessary for the purpose assigned
by Lady Arabella, as Mary was not given to be flustered by such
occurrences; but, perhaps, it was as well as that it was written, as it
enabled her to make up her mind steadily as to what information should
be given, and what should not be given to her coming visitor.

On the next morning, at the appointed hour, Lady Arabella walked down to
the doctor's house. She never walked about the village without making
some little disturbance among the inhabitants. With the squire, himself,
they were quite familiar, and he could appear and reappear without
creating any sensation; but her ladyship had not made herself equally
common in men's sight. Therefore, when she went through all the
Greshamsbury in ten minutes, and before she had left the house, Mrs
Umbleby and Miss Gushing had quite settled between them what was the
exact cause of the very singular event.

The doctor, when he had heard what was going to happen, carefully kept
out of the way: Mary, therefore, had the pleasure of receiving Lady
Arabella alone. Nothing could exceed her ladyship's affability. Mary
thought that it perhaps might have savoured less of condescension; but
then on this subject, Mary was probably prejudiced. Lady Arabella smiled
and simpered, and asked after the doctor, and the cat, and Janet, and
said everything that could be desired by any one less unreasonable than
Mary Thorne.

'And now, Mary, I'll tell you why I have called.' Mary bowed her head
slightly, as much to say, that she would be glad to receive any
information that Lady Arabella could give her on that subject. 'Of
course you know that Beatrice is going to be married very shortly.'

Mary acknowledged that she had heard so much.

'Yes: we think it will be in September--early in September--and that is
coming very soon now. The poor girl is anxious that you should be at her
wedding.' Mary turned slightly red; but she merely said, and that
somewhat too coldly, that she was much indebted to Beatrice for her
kindness.

'I can assure you, Mary, that she is very fond of you, as much as ever;
and so, indeed, am I, and all of us are so. You know that Mr Gresham was
always your friend.'

'Yes, he always was, and I am grateful to Mr Gresham,' answered Mary. It
was well for Lady Arabella that she had her temper under command, for
had she spoken her mind out there would have been very little chance
left for reconciliation between her and Mary.

'Yes, indeed he was; and I think we all did what little we could to make
you welcome at Greshamsbury, Mary, till those unpleasant occurrences
took place.'

'What occurrences, Lady Arabella?'

'And Beatrice is so very anxious on this point,' said her ladyship,
ignoring for the moment Mary's question. 'You two have been so much
together, that she feels she cannot be quite happy if you are not near
her when she is being married.'

'Dear Beatrice!' said Mary, warmed for the moment to an expression of
genuine feeling.

'She came to me yesterday, begging that I would waive any objection I
might have to your being there. I have made her no answer yet. What
answer do you think I ought to make her?'

Mary was astounded at this question, and hesitated in her reply.  'What
answer do you think I ought to make her?' she said.

'Yes, Mary.  What answer to you think I ought to give?  I wish to ask
you the question, as you are the person the most concerned.'

Mary considered for a while, then did give her opinion on the matter in
a firm voice. 'I think you should tell Beatrice, that as you cannot at
present receive me cordially in your house, it will be better that you
should not be called upon to receive me at all.'

This was certainly not the sort of answer that Lady Arabella expected,
and she was now somewhat astounded in her turn. 'But, Mary,' she said,
'I should be delighted to receive you cordially if I could do so.'

'But it seems you cannot, Lady Arabella; and so there must be an end of
it.'

'On, but I do not know that:' and she smiled her sweetest smile.  'I do
not know that. I want to put an end to all this ill-feeling, if I can.
It all depends upon one thing, you know.'

'Does it, Lady Arabella?'

'Yes, upon one thing.  You won't be angry if I ask you another
question--eh, Mary?'

'No; at least I don't think I will.'

'Is there any truth in what we hear about your being engaged to Frank?'

Mary made no immediate answer to this; but sat quite silent, looking at
Lady Arabella in the face; not but that she had made up her mind as to
what answer she would give, but the exact words failed her at the
moment.

'Of course you must have heard of such a rumour.'

'Oh, yes, I have heard of it.'

'Yes, and you have noticed it, and I must say very properly. When you
went to Boxall Hill, and before that with Miss Oriel's to her aunt's, I
thought you behaved extremely well.' Mary felt herself glow with
indignation, and began to prepare the words that should be sharp and
decisive. 'But, nevertheless, people talk; and Frank, who is still quite
a boy' (Mary's indignation was not softened by this allusion to Frank's
folly), 'seems to have got some nonsense in his head. I grieve to say
it, but I feel myself in justice bound to do so, that in this matter he
has not acted as well as you have done. Now, therefore, I merely ask you
whether there is any truth in the report. If you tell me that there is
none, I shall be quite contented.'

'But it is altogether true, Lady Arabella; I am engaged to him.'

'Engaged to be married to him?'

'Yes; engaged to be married to him.'

What was to say or do now?  Nothing could be more plain, more decided,
or less embarrassed with doubt than Mary's declaration. And as she made
it she looked her visitor full in the face, blushing indeed, for her
cheeks were now suffused as well as her forehead; but boldly, and, as it
were, with defiance.

'And you tell me that to my face, Miss Thorne?'

'And why not?  Did you not ask me the question; and would you have my
answer you with a falsehood? I am engaged to him. As you would put the
question to me, what other could I make? The truth is, I am engaged to
him.'

The decisive abruptness with which Mary declared her own iniquity almost
took away her ladyship's breath. She had certainly believed that they
were engaged, and had hardly hoped that Mary would deny it; but she had
not expected that the crime would be acknowledged, or, at any rate, if
acknowledged, that the confession would be made without some show of
shame. On this Lady Arabella could have worked; but there was no such
expression, nor was there the slightest hesitation. 'I am engaged to
Frank Gresham,' and having so said, Mary looked at her visitor full in
the face.

'Then it is indeed impossible that you should be received at
Greshamsbury.'

'At present, quite so, no doubt: in saying so, Lady Arabella, you only
repeat the answer I made to your first question. I can now go to
Greshamsbury only in one light: that of Mr Gresham's accepted
daughter-in-law.'

'And that is perfectly out of the question; altogether out of the
question, now and for ever.'

'I will not dispute with you about that; but, as I said before, my being
at Beatrice's wedding is not to be thought of.'

Lady Arabella sat for a while silent, that she might meditate, if
possible, calmly as to what line of argument she had now better take. It
would be foolish in her, she thought, to return home, having merely
expressed her anger. She had now an opportunity of talking to Mary which
might not again occur: the difficulty was in deciding in what special
way she should use the opportunity. Should she threaten, or should she
entreat? To do her justice, it should be stated, that she did actually
believe that the marriage was all but impossible; she did not think that
it would take place. But the engagement might be the ruin of her son's
prospects, seeing how he had before him an imperative, one immediate
duty--that of marrying money.

Having considered all this as well as her hurry would allow her, she
determined first to reason, then to entreat, and lastly, if necessary,
to threaten.

'I am astonished!  you cannot be surprised at that, Miss Thorne: I am
astonished at hearing so singular confession made.'

'Do you think my confession singular, or is it the fact of my being
engaged to your son?'

'We will pass over that for the present.  But do let me ask you, do you
think it possible, I say possible, that you and Frank should be
married?'

'Oh, certainly; quite possible.'

'Of course you know that he has not a shilling in the world.'

'Nor have I, Lady Arabella.'

'Nor will he have were he to do anything so utterly hostile to his
father's wishes. The property, as you are aware, is altogether at Mr
Gresham's disposal.'

'I am aware of nothing about the property, and can say nothing about it
except this, that it has not been, and will not be inquired after by me
in this matter. If I marry Frank Gresham, it will not be for the
property. I am sorry to make such an apparent boast, but you force me to
do it.'

'On what then are you to live?  You are too old for love in a cottage, I
suppose?'

'Not at all too old; Frank, you know is "still quite a boy".'

Impudent hussy! forward, ill-conditioned saucy minx! such were the
epithets which rose to Lady Arabella's mind; but she politely suppressed
them.

'Miss Thorne, this subject is of course to me very serious; very
ill-adapted for jesting. I look upon such a marriage as absolutely
impossible.'

'I do not know what you mean by impossible, Lady Arabella.'

'I mean, in the first place, that you two could not get yourselves
married.'

'Oh, yes; Mr Oriel would manage that for us.  We are his parishioners,
and he would be bound to do it.'

'I beg your pardon; I believe that under all the circumstances it would
be illegal.'

Mary smiled; but she said nothing.  'You may laugh, Miss Thorne, but I
think you will find that I am right. There are still laws to prevent
such fearful distress as would be brought about by such a marriage.'

'I hope that nothing I shall do will bring distress on the family.'

'Ah, but it would; don't you know that it would?  Think of it, Miss
Thorne. Think of Frank's state, and of his father's state. You know
enough of that, I am sure, to be well aware that Frank is not in a
condition to marry without money. Think of the position which Mr
Gresham's only son should hold in the county; think of the old name, and
the pride we have in it; you have lived among us enough to understand
all this; think of these things, and then say whether it is possible
that such a marriage should take place without family distress of the
deepest kind. Think of Mr Gresham; if you truly love my son, you could
not wish to bring on him all this misery and ruin.'

Mary now was touched, for there was truth in what Lady Arabella said.
But she had no power of going back; her troth was plighted, and nothing
any human being could say should take her from it. If he, indeed, chose
to repent, that would be another thing.

'Lady Arabella,' she said, 'I have nothing to say in favour of this
engagement, except that he wishes it.'

'And is this a reason, Mary?'

'To me it is; not only a reason, but a law.  I have given him my
promise.'

'And you will keep your promise even to his own ruin?'

'I hope not.  Our engagement, unless he shall choose to break it off,
must necessarily be a long one; but the time will come--'

'What! when Mr Gresham is dead?'

'Before that, I hope.'

'There is no probability of it.  And because he is headstrong, you, who
have always had credit for so much sense, will hold him to this mad
engagement?'

'No, Lady Arabella; I will not hold him to anything to which he does not
wish to be held. Nothing that you can say shall move me: nothing that
anybody can say shall induce me to break my promise to him. But a word
from himself will do it. One look will be sufficient. Let him give me to
understand, in any way, that his love for me is injurious to him--that
he has learnt to think so--and then I will renounce my part in this
engagement as quickly as you could wish it.'

There was much in this promise, but still not so much as Lady Arabella
wished to get. Mary, she knew, was obstinate, yet reasonable; Frank, she
thought, was both obstinate and unreasonable. It might be possible to
work on Mary's reason, but quite impossible to touch Frank's
irrationality. So she persevered--foolishly.

'Miss Thorne--that, is, Mary, for I still wish to be thought your
friend--'

'I will tell you the truth, Lady Arabella: for some considerable time
past I have not thought you so.'

'Then you have wronged me.  But I will go on with what I was saying. You
quite acknowledge that this is a foolish affair?'

'I acknowledge no such thing.'

'Something very much like it.  You have not a word to say in its
defence.'

'Not to you: I do not choose to be put on my defence by you.'

'I don't know who has more right; however, you promise that if Frank
wishes it, you will release him from his engagement.'

'Release him!  It is for him to release me, that is, if he wishes it.'

'Very well; at any rate, you give him permission to do so.  But will it
not be more honourable for you to begin?'

'No; I think not.'

'Ah, but it would.  If he, in his position, should be the first to
speak, the first to suggest that this affair between you is a foolish
one, what would people say?'

'They would say the truth.'

'And what would you yourself say?'

'Nothing.'

'What would he think himself?'

'Ah, that I do not know.  It is according as that may be, that he will
or will not act at your bidding.'

'Exactly; and because you know him to be high-minded, because you think
that he, having so much to give, will not break his word to you--to you
who have nothing to give in return--it is, therefore, that you say that
the first step must be taken by him. It that noble?'

Then Mary rose from her seat, for it was no longer possible for her to
speak what it was in her to say, sitting there leisurely on her sofa.
Lady Arabella's worship of money had not hitherto been so brought
forward in the conversation as to give her unpardonable offence; but now
she felt that she could no longer restrain her indignation. 'To you who
have nothing to give in return!' Had she not given all that she
possessed? Had she not emptied his store into her lap? that heart of
hers, beating with such genuine life, capable of such perfect love,
throbbing with so grand a pride; had she not given that? And was it not
that, between him and her, more than twenty Greshamsburys, nobler than
any pedigree? 'To you who have nothing to give,' indeed! This to her who
was so ready to give everything!

'Lady Arabella,' she said, 'I think that you do not understand me, and
that it is not likely that you should. If so, our further talking will
be worse than useless. I have taken no account of what will be given
between your son and me in your sense of the word giving. But he has
professed to--to love me'--as she spoke, she still looked on the lady's
face, but her eyelashes screened her eyes, and her colour was a little
heightened--'and I have acknowledged that I also love him, and so we are
engaged. To me my promise is sacred. I will not be threatened into
breaking it. If, however, he shall wish to change his mind, he can do
so. I will not upbraid him; will not, if I can help it, think harshly of
him. So much you may tell him if it suits you; but I will not listen to
your calculations as to how much or how little each of us may have to
give to the other.'

She was still standing when she finished speaking, and so she continued
to stand. Her eyes were fixed on Lady Arabella, and her position seemed
to say that sufficient words had been spoken, and that it was time that
her ladyship should go; and so Lady Arabella felt it. Gradually she also
rose; slowly, but tacitly, she acknowledged that she was in the presence
of a spirit superior to her own; and so she took her leave.

'Very well,' she said, in a tone that was intended to be grandiloquent,
but which failed grievously; 'I will tell him that he has your
permission to think a second time on this matter. I do not doubt that he
will do so.' Mary would not condescend to answer, but curtsied low as
her visitor left the room. And so the interview was over.

The interview was over, and Mary was alone.  She remained standing as
long as she heard the footsteps of Frank's mother on the stairs; not
immediately thinking of what had passed, but still buoying herself up
with her hot indignation, as though her work with Lady Arabella was not
yet finished; but when the footfall was no longer heard, and the sound
of the closing door told her that she was in truth alone, she sank back
in her seat, and, covering her face with her hands, burst into bitter
tears.

All that doctrine about money was horrible to her; that insolent
pretence, that she had caught at Frank because of his worldly position,
made her all but ferocious; but Lady Arabella had not the less spoken
much that was true. She did think of the position which the heir of
Greshamsbury should hold in the county, and of the fact that such a
marriage would mar that position so vitally; she did think of the old
name, and the old Gresham pride; she did think of the squire and his
deep distress: it was true that she had lived among them long enough to
understand these things, and to know that it was not possible that this
marriage should take place without deep family sorrow.

And then she asked herself whether, in consenting to accept Frank's
hand, she had adequately considered this; and she was forced to
acknowledge that she had not considered it. She had ridiculed Lady
Arabella for saying that Frank was still a boy; but was it not true that
his offer had been made with a boy's energy, rather than a man's
forethought? If so, if she had been wrong to accede to that offer when
made, would she not be doubly wrong to hold him to it now that she saw
his error?

It was doubtless true that Frank himself could not be the first to draw
back. What would people say of him? She could now calmly ask herself the
question that had so angered her, when asked by Lady Arabella. If he
could not do it, and if, nevertheless, it behoved them to break off this
match, by whom was it to be done if not by her? Was not Lady Arabella
right throughout, right in her conclusions, though so foully wrong in
her manner of drawing them?

And then she did think for one moment of herself.  'You who have nothing
to give in return!' Such had been Lady Arabella's main accusation
against her. Was it in fact true that she had nothing to give? Her
maiden love, her feminine pride, her very life, and spirit, and
being--were these things nothing? Were they to be weighed against pounds
sterling per annum? and, when so weighed, were they ever to kick the
beam like feathers? All these things had been nothing to her when,
without reflection, governed wholly by the impulse of the moment, she
had first allowed his daring hand to lie for an instant in her own. She
had thought nothing of these things when that other suitor came, richer
far than Frank, to love whom it was impossible to her as it was not to
love him.

Her love had been pure from all such thoughts; she was conscious that it
ever would be pure from them. Lady Arabella was unable to comprehend
this, and, therefore, was Lady Arabella so utterly distasteful to her.

Frank had once held her close to his warm breast; and her very soul had
thrilled with joy to feel that he so loved her,--with a joy which she
hardly dared to acknowledge. At that moment, her maidenly efforts had
been made to push him off, but her heart had grown to his. She had
acknowledged him to be master of her spirit; her bosom's lord; the man
whom she had been born to worship; the human being to whom it was for
her to link her destiny. Frank's acres had been of no account; nor had
his want of acres. God had brought them two together that they should
love each other; that conviction had satisfied her, and she had made it
a duty to herself that she would love him with her very soul. And now
she was called upon to wrench herself asunder from him because she had
nothing to give in return!

Well, she would wrench herself asunder, as far as such wrenching might
be done compatibly with her solemn promise. It might be right that Frank
should have an opportunity offered him, so that he might escape from his
position without disgrace. She would endeavour to give him this
opportunity. So, with one deep sigh, she arose, took herself pen, ink,
and paper, and sat herself down again so that the wrenching might begin.

And then, for a moment, she thought of her uncle.  Why had he not spoken
to her of all this? Why had he not warned her? He who had ever been so
good to her, why had he now failed her so grievously? She had told him
everything, had had no secret from him; but he had never answered her a
word. 'He also must have known' she said to herself, piteously, 'he also
must have known that I could give nothing in return.' Such accusation,
however, availed her not at all, so she sat down and slowly wrote her
letter.

'Dearest Frank,' she began.  She had first written 'dear Mr Gresham';
but her heart revolted against such useless coldness. She was not going
to pretend she did not love him.

'DEAREST FRANK,

'Your mother has been here talking to me about our engagement.
I do not generally agree with her about such matters; but she
has said some things to-day which I cannot but acknowledge to
be true. She says, that our marriage would be distressing to
your father, injurious to all your family, and ruinous to
yourself. If this be so, how can I, who love you, wish for
such a marriage?

'I remember my promise, and have kept it.  I would not yield
to your mother when she desired me to disclaim our engagement.
But I do think it will be more prudent if you will consent to
forget all that has passed between us--not, perhaps, to forget
it; that may not be possible for us--but to let it pass by as
though it had never been. If so, if you think so, dear Frank,
do not have any scruples on my account. What will be best for
you, must be best for me. Think what a reflection it would
ever be to me, to have been the ruin of one that I love so
well.

'Let me have but one word to say that I am released from my
promise, and I will tell my uncle that the matter between us
is over. It will be painful for us at first; those occasional
meetings which must take place will distress us, but that will
wear off. We shall always think well of each other, and why
should we not be friends? This, doubtless, cannot be done
without inward wounds; but such wounds are in God's hands, and
He can cure them.

'I know your first feelings will be on reading this letter;
but do not answer it in obedience to such feelings. Think over
it, think of your father, and all you owe him, of your old
name, your old family, and what the world expects of you.'
(Mary was forced to put her hand to her eyes, to save the
paper from her falling tears, as she found herself thus
repeating, nearly word for word, the arguments that had been
used by Lady Arabella.) 'Think of these things coolly, if you
can, but, at any rate, without passion: and then let me have
one word in answer. One word will suffice.

'I have but to add this: do not allow yourself to think that
my heart will ever reproach you. It cannot reproach you for
doing that which I myself suggest.' (Mary's logic in this was
very false; but she was not herself aware of it.) 'I will
never reproach you either in word or thought; and as for all
others, it seems to me that the world agrees that we have
hitherto been wrong. The world, I hope, will be satisfied when
we have obeyed it.

'Go bless you, dearest Frank!  I shall never call you so
again; but it would be a pretence were I to write otherwise in
this letter. Think of this, and then let me have one line.

'Your affectionate friend, 
MARY THORNE'

'PS.--Of course I cannot be at dear Beatrice's marriage; but
when they come back to the parsonage, I shall see her. I am
sure they will both be happy, because they are so good. I need
hardly say that I shall think of them on their wedding day.'

When she finished the letter, she addressed it plainly, in her own
somewhat bold handwriting, to Francis N. Gresham, Jun., Esq., and then
took it herself to the little village post-office. There should be
nothing underhand about her correspondence: all the Greshamsbury world
should know of it--that world of which she had spoken in her letter--if
that world so pleased. Having put her penny label on it, she handed it,
with an open brow and an unembarrassed face, to the baker's wife, who
was Her Majesty's postmistress at Greshamsbury; and, having so finished
her work, she returned to see the table prepared for her uncle's dinner.
'I will say nothing to him,' she said to herself, 'till I get the
answer. He will not talk to me about it, so why should I trouble him?'



CHAPTER XLIII

THE RACE OF SCATCHERD BECOMES EXTINCT

It will not be imagined, at any rate by feminine readers, that Mary's
letter was written off at once, without alterations and changes, or the
necessity for a fair copy. Letters from one young lady to another are
doubtless written in this manner, and even with them it might sometimes
be better if more patience had been taken; but with Mary's first letter
to her lover--her first love-letter, if love-letter it can be
called-much more care was used. It was copied and re-copied, and when
she returned from posting it, it was read and re-read.

'It is very cold,' she said to herself; 'he will think I have no heart,
that I have never loved him!' And then she all but resolved to run down
to the baker's wife, and get back her letter, that she might alter it.
'But it will be better so,' she said again. 'If I touched his feelings
now, he would never bring himself to leave me. It is right that I should
be cold with him. I should be false to myself if I tried to move his
love--I, who have nothing to give him in return for it.' And so she made
no further visit to the post-office, and the letter went on its way.

We will now follow its fortunes for a short while, and explain how it
was that Mary received no answer for a week; a week, it may well be
imagined, of terrible suspense to her. When she took it to the
post-office, she doubtless thought that the baker's wife had nothing to
do but to send it up to the house at Greshamsbury, and that Frank would
receive it that evening, or, at latest, early on the following morning.
But this was by no means so. The epistle was posted on a Friday
afternoon, and it behoved the baker's wife to send it into
Silverbridge--Silverbridge being the post-town--so that all due
formalities, as ordered by the Queen's Government, might there be
perfected. Now, unfortunately the post-boy had taken his departure
before Mary reached the shop, and it was not, therefore, dispatched till
Saturday. Sunday was always a dies non with the Greshamsbury Mercury,
and, consequently, Frank's letter was not delivered at the house till
Monday morning; at which time Mary had for two long days been waiting
with weary heart for the expected answer.

Now Frank had on that morning gone up to London by the early train, with
his future brother-in-law, Mr Oriel. In order to accomplish this, they
had left Greshamsbury for Barchester exactly as the postboy was leaving
Silverbridge for Greshamsbury.

'I should like to wait for my letters,' Mr Oriel had said, when the
journey was being discussed.

'Nonsense,' Frank had answered.  'Who ever got a letter that was worth
waiting for?' and so Mary was doomed to a week of misery.

When the post-bag arrived at the house on Monday morning it was opened
as usual by the squire himself at the breakfast-table. 'Here is a letter
for Frank,' said he, 'posted in the village. You had better send it to
him:' and he threw the letter across to Beatrice.

'It's from Mary,' said Beatrice, out loud, taking the letter up and
examining the address. And having said so, she repented what she had
done, as she looked first at her father and then at her mother.

A cloud came over the squire's brow as for a minute he went on turning
over the letters and newspapers. 'Oh, from Mary Thorne, is it?' he said.
'Well, you had better send it to him.'

'Frank said that if any letters came they were to be kept,' said his
sister Sophy. 'He told me so particularly. I don't think he likes having
letters sent to him.'

'You had better send that one,' said the squire.

'Mr Oriel is to have all his letters addressed to Long's Hotel, Bond
Street, and this one can very well be sent with them,' said Beatrice,
who knew all about it, and intended herself to make free use of the
address.

'Yes, you had better send it,' said the squire; and then nothing further
was said at the table. But Lady Arabella, though she said nothing, had
not failed to mark what had passed. Had she asked for the letter before
the squire, he would probably have taken possession of it himself; but
as soon as she was alone with Beatrice, she did demand it, 'I shall be
writing to Frank himself,' she said, 'and will send it to him.' And so,
Beatrice, with a heavy heart, gave it up.

The letter lay before Lady Arabella's eyes all that day, and many a
wistful glance was cast at it. She turned it over and over, and much
desired to know its contents; but she did not dare to break the seal of
her son's letter. All that day it lay upon her desk, and all the next,
for she could hardly bring herself to part with it; but on the Wednesday
it was sent--sent with these lines from herself:-

'Dearest, dearest Frank, I send you a letter which has come by the post
from Mary Thorne. I do not know what it may contain; but before you
correspond with her, pray, pray think of what I said to you. For my
sake, for your father's, for your own, pray think of it.'

That was all, but it was enough to make her word to Beatrice true.  She
did send it to Frank enclosed in a letter from herself. We must reserve
for the next chapter what had taken place between Frank and his mother;
but, for the present, we will return to the doctor's house.

Mary said not a word to him about the letter; but, keeping silent on the
subject, she felt wretchedly estranged from him. 'Is anything the
matter, Mary?' he said to her on the Sunday afternoon.

'No, uncle,' she answered, turning away her head to hide her tears.

'Ah, but there is something; what is it, dearest?'

'Nothing--that is, nothing that one can talk about.'

'What Mary!  Be unhappy and not to talk about it to me?  That's
something new, is it not?'

'One has presentiments sometimes, and is unhappy without knowing why.
Besides, you know--'

'I know!  What do I know?  Do I know anything that will make my pet
happier?' and he took her into his arms and they sat together on the
sofa. Her tears were now falling fast, and she no longer made an effort
to hide them. 'Speak to me, Mary; this is something more than a
presentiment. What is it?'

'Oh, uncle--'

'Come, love, speak to me; tell me why you are grieving.'

'Oh, uncle, why have you not spoken to me?  Why have you not told me
what to do? Why have you not advised me? Why are you always so silent?'

'Silent about what?'

'You know, uncle; silent about him; silent about Frank.'

Why, indeed?  What was he to say to this?  It was true that he had never
counselled her; never shown her what course she should take; had never
even spoke to her about her lover. And it was equally true that he was
not now prepared to do so, even in answer to such an appeal as this. He
had a hope, a strong hope, more than a hope, that Mary's love would yet
be happy; but he could not express or explain his hope; nor could he
even acknowledge to himself a wish that would seem to be based on the
death of him to whose life he was bound, if possible, to preserve.

'My love,' he said, 'it is a matter in which you must judge for
yourself. Did I doubt your conduct, I should interfere; but I do not.'

'Conduct!  Is conduct everything?  One may conduct oneself excellently,
and yet break one's heart.'

This was too much for the doctor; his sternness and firmness instantly
deserted him. 'Mary,' he said, 'I will do anything that you would have
me. If you wish it, I will make arrangements for leaving this place at
once.'

'Oh, no,' she said, plaintively.

'When you tell me of a broken heart, you almost break my own. Come to
me, darling; do not leave me so. I will say all that I can say. I have
thought, do still think, that circumstances will admit of your marriage
with Frank if you both love each other, and can both be patient.'

'You think so,' said she, unconsciously sliding her hand into his, as
though to thank him by its pressure for the comfort he was giving her.

'I do think so now more than ever.  But I only think so; I have been
unable to assure you. There, darling, I must not say more; only that I
cannot bear to see you grieving, I would not have said this:' and then
he left her, and nothing more was spoken on the subject.

If you can be patient!  Why, a patience of ten years would be as nothing
to her. Could she but live with the knowledge that she was first in his
estimation, dearest in his heart; could it be also granted to her to
feel that she was regarded as his equal, she could be patient for ever.
What more did she want than to know and feel this? Patient, indeed!

But what could these circumstances be to which her uncle had alluded? 'I
do think that circumstances will admit of your marriage.' Such was his
opinion, and she had never known him to be wrong. Circumstances! What
circumstances? Did he perhaps mean that Mr Gresham's affairs were not so
bad as they had been thought to be? If so, that alone would hardly alter
the matter, for what could she give in return? 'I would give him the
world for one word of love,' she said to herself, 'and never think that
he was my debtor. Ah! how beggarly the heart must be that speculates on
such gifts as those!'

But there was her uncle's opinion: he still thought that they might be
married. Oh, why had she sent her letter? and why had she made it so
cold? With such a letter as that before him, Frank could not do other
than consent to her proposal. And then, why did he not at least answer
it?

On the Sunday afternoon there arrived at Greshamsbury a man and a horse
from Boxall Hill, bearing a letter from Lady Scatcherd to Dr Thorne,
earnestly requesting the doctor's immediate attendance. 'I fear
everything is over with poor Louis,' wrote the unhappy mother. 'It has
been dreadful. Do come to me; I have no other friend, and I am nearly
worn through with it. The man from the city'--she meant Dr
Fillgrave--'comes every day, and I dare say he is all very well, but he
has never done much good. He has not had spirit enough to keep the
bottle from him; and it was that, and that only, that most behoved to be
done. I doubt you won't find him in this world when you get here.'

Dr Thorne started immediately.  Even though he might have to meet Dr
Fillgrave, he could not hesitate, for he went not as a doctor to the
dying man, but as the trustee under Sir Roger's will. Moreover, as Lady
Scatcherd had said, he was only her friend, and he could not desert her
at such a moment for an army of Fillgraves. He told Mary he should not
return that night; and taking with him a small saddle-bag, he started at
once for Boxall Hill.

As he rode to the hall door, Dr Fillgrave was getting into his carriage.
They had never met so as to speak to each other since that memorable
day, when they had their famous passage of arms in the hall of that very
house before which they both now stood. But, at the present moment,
neither of them was disposed to renew the fight.

'What news of your patient, Fillgrave?' said our doctor, still seated on
his sweating horse, and putting his hand lightly to his hat.

Dr Fillgrave could not refrain from one moment of supercilious disdain:
he gave one little chuck to his head, one little twist to his neck, one
little squeeze to his lips, and then the man within him overcame the
doctor. 'Sir Louis is no more,' he said.

'God's will be done!' said Dr Thorne.

'His death is a release; for his last days have been very frightful.
Your coming, Dr Thorne, will be a comfort to Lady Scatcherd.' And then
Dr Fillgrave, thinking that even the present circumstances required no
further condescension, ensconced himself in the carriage.

'His last days have been very dreadful!  Ah, me, poor fellow! Dr
Fillgrave, before you go, allow me to say this: I am quite aware that
when he fell into your hands, no medical skill in the world could save
him.'

Dr Fillgrave bowed low from the carriage, and after this unwonted
exchange of courtesies, the two doctors parted, not to meet again--at
any rate, in the pages of this novel. Of Dr Fillgrave, let it now be
said, that he is now regarded as one of the celebrities of Barchester.

Lady Scatcherd was found sitting alone in her little room on the
ground-floor. Even Hannah was not with her, for Hannah was now occupied
upstairs. When the doctor entered the room, which he did unannounced, he
found her seated on a chair, with her back against one of the presses,
her hands clasped together over her knees, gazing into vacancy. She did
not ever hear him or see him as he approached, and his hand had lightly
touched her shoulder before she knew that she was not alone. Then, she
looked up at him with a face so full of sorrow, so worn with suffering,
that his own heart was racked to see her.

'It's all over, my friend,' said he.  'It is better so; much better so.'

She seemed at first hardly to understand him, but still regarding him
with that wan face, shook her head slowly and sadly. One might have
thought that she was twenty years older than when Dr Thorne last saw
her.

He drew a chair to her side, and sitting by her, took her hand in his.
'It is better so, Lady Scatcherd; better so,' he repeated. 'The poor
lad's doom had been spoken, and it is well for him, and for you, that it
should be over.'

'They are both gone now,' said she, speaking very low; 'both gone now.
Oh, doctor! To be left alone here, all alone!'

He said some few words trying to comfort her; but who can comfort a
widow bereaved of her child? Who can console a heart that has lost all
it possessed? Sir Roger had not been to her a tender husband; but still
he had been the husband of her love. Sir Louis had not been to her an
affectionate son; but still he had been her child, her only child. Now
they were both gone. Who can wonder that the world should be a blank to
her?

Still the doctor spoke soothing words, and still he held her hand.  He
knew that his words could not console her; but the sounds of his
kindness at such desolate moments are, to such minds as hers, some
alleviation of grief. She hardly answered him, but sat there staring out
before her, leaving her hand passively to him, and swaying her head
backwards and forwards as though her grief were too heavy to be borne.

At last, her eye rested upon an article which stood upon the table, and
she started up impetuously from her chair. She did this so suddenly,
that the doctor's hand fell beside him before he knew that she had
risen. The table was covered with all those implements which become so
frequent about a house when severe illness is an inhabitant there. There
were little boxes and apothecaries' bottles, cups and saucers standing
separate, and bowls, in which messes have been prepared with the hope of
suiting a sick man's failing appetite. There was a small saucepan
standing on a plate, a curiously shaped glass utensil left by the
doctor, and sundry pieces of flannel, which had been used in rubbing the
sufferer's limbs. But in the middle of the debris stood one blank
bottle, with head erect, unsuited to the companionship in which it was
found.

'There,' she said, rising up, and seizing it in a manner that would have
been ridiculous had it not been so truly tragic. 'There, that has robbed
me of everything--of father and son; that has swallowed them
both--murdered them both! Oh, doctor! that such a thing as that should
ever cause such bitter sorrow! I have hated it always, but now--Oh, woe
is me! weary me!' And then she let the bottle drop from her hand as
though it were too heavy for her.

'This comes of barro-niting,' she continued.  'If they had let him
alone, he would have been here now, and so would the other one. Why did
they do it? why did they do it? Ah, doctor! people such as us should
never meddle with them above us. See what has come of it; see what has
come of it!'

The doctor could not remain with her long, as it was necessary that he
should take upon himself the direction of the household, and give orders
for the funeral. First of all, he had to undergo the sad duty of seeing
the corpse of the deceased baronet. This, at any rate, may be spared to
my readers. It was found to be necessary that the internment should be
made very quickly, as the body was nearly destroyed by alcohol. Having
done all this, and sent back his horse to Greshamsbury, with directions
that clothes for a journey might be sent to him, and a notice that he
should not be home for some days, he again returned to Lady Scatcherd.

Of course he could not but think much of the immense property which was
now, for a short time, altogether in his own hands. His resolution was
soon made to go at once to London and consult the best lawyer he could
find--or the best dozen lawyers should such be necessary--as to the
validity of Mary's claims. This must be done before he said a word to
her or to any of the Gresham family; but it must be done instantly, so
that all suspense might be at an end as soon as possible. He must, of
course, remain with Lady Scatcherd till the funeral should be over; but
when that office should be complete, he would start instantly for
London.

In resolving to tell no one as to Mary's fortune till after he had
fortified himself with legal warranty, he made one exception. He thought
it rational that he should explain to Lady Scatcherd who was now the
heir under her husband's will; and he was more inclined to do so, from
feeling that the news would probably be gratifying to her. With this
view, he had once or twice endeavoured to induce her to talk about the
property, but she had been unwilling to do so. She seemed to dislike all
allusions to it, and it was not until she had incidentally mentioned the
fact that she would have to look for a home, that he was able to fix her
to the subject. This was on the evening before the funeral; on the
afternoon of which day he intended to proceed to London.

'It may probably be arranged that you may continue to live here,' said
the doctor.

'I don't wish it at all,' said she, rather sharply.  'I don't wish to
have any arrangements made. I would not be indebted to any of them for
anything. Oh, dear! if money could make it all right, I should have
enough of that.'

'Indebted to whom, Lady Scatcherd?  Who do you think will be the owner
of Boxall Hill?'

'Indeed, then, Dr Thorne, I don't much care: unless it be yourself, it
won't be any friend of mine, or any one I shall care to make a friend
of. It isn't so easy for an old woman like me to make new friends.'

'Well, it certainly won't belong to me.'

'I wish it did, with all my heart.  But even then, I would not live
here. I have had too many troubles here to wish to see more.'

'That shall be as you like, Lady Scatcherd; but you will be surprised to
hear that the place will--at least I think it will--belong to a friend
of yours: to one to whom you have been very kind.'

'And who is he, doctor?  Won't it go to some of those Americans?  I am
sure I never did anything kind to them; though, indeed, I did love poor
Mary Scatcherd. But that's years upon years ago, and she is dead, and
gone now. Well, I begrudge nothing to Mary's children. As I have none of
my own, it is right that they should have the money. It has not made me
happy; I hope it may do them.'

'The property will, I think, go to Mary Scatcherd's eldest child.  It is
she whom you have known as Mary Thorne.'

'Doctor!'  And then Lady Scatcherd, as she made the exclamation, put
both her hands down to hold her chair, as though she feared the weight
of her surprise would topple her off her seat.

'Yes; Mary Thorne--my Mary--to whom you have been so good, who loves you
so well; she, I believe, will be Sir Roger's heiress. And it was so that
Sir Roger intended on his deathbed, in the event of poor Louis's life
being cut short. If this be so, will you be ashamed to stay here as the
guest of Mary Thorne? She has not been ashamed to be your guest.'

But Lady Scatcherd was now too much interested in the general tenor of
the news which she had heard to care much about the house which she was
to inhabit in future. Mary Thorne, the heiress of Boxall Hill! Mary
Thorne, the still living child of that poor creature who had so nearly
died when they were all afflicted with their early grief! Well; there
was consolation, there was comfort in this. There were but three people
left in the world that she could love: her foster-child, Frank
Gresham--Mary Thorne, and the doctor. If the money went to Mary, it
would of course go to Frank, for she now knew that they loved each
other; and if it went to them, would not the doctor have his share also;
such share as he might want? Could she have governed the matter, she
would have given all to Frank; and now it would be as well bestowed.

Yes; there was consolation in this.  They both sat up more than half the
night talking over it, and giving and receiving explanations. If only
the council of lawyers would not be adverse! That was now the point of
suspense.

The doctor, before he left her, bade her hold her peace, and say nothing
of Mary's fortune to any one till her rights have been absolutely
acknowledged. 'It will be nothing not to have it,' said the doctor; 'but
it would be very bad to hear it was hers, and then to lose it.'

On the next morning, Dr Thorne deposited the remains of Sir Louis in the
vault prepared for the family in the parish church. He laid the son
where a few months ago he had laid the father,--and so the title of
Scatcherd became extinct. Their race of honour had not been long.

After the funeral, the doctor hurried up to London, and there we will
leave him.



CHAPTER XLIV

SATURDAY EVENING AND SUNDAY MORNING

We must now go back a little and describe how Frank had been sent off on
special business to London. The household at Greshamsbury was at this
time in but a doleful state. It seemed to be pervaded, from the squire
down to the scullery-maid, with a feeling that things were not going
well; and men and women, in spite of Beatrice's coming marriage, were
grim-visaged, and dolorous. Mr Mortimer Gazebee, rejected though he had
been, still, went and came, talking much to the squire, much also to her
ladyship, as to the ill-doings which were in the course of projection by
Sir Louis; and Frank went about the house with clouded brow, as though
finally resolved to neglect his one great duty.

Poor Beatrice was robbed of half her joy; over and over again her
brother asked her whether she had yet seen Mary, and she was obliged as
often to answer that she had not. Indeed, she did not dare to visit her
friend, for it was hardly possible that they should sympathize with each
other. Mary was, to say the least, stubborn in her pride; and Beatrice,
though she could forgive her friend for loving her brother, could not
forgive the obstinacy with which Mary persisted in a course which, as
Beatrice thought, she herself knew to be wrong.

And then Mr Gazebee came down from town, with an intimation that it
behoved the squire himself to go up that he might see certain learned
pundits, and be badgered in his own person at various dingy, dismal
chambers in Lincoln's Inn Fields, the Temple, and Gray's Inn Lane. It
was an invitation exactly of that sort which a good many years ago was
given to a certain duck.

'Will you, will you--will you, will you--come and be killed?'  Although
Mr Gazebee urged the matter with such eloquence, the squire remained
steady to his objection, and swam obstinately about his Greshamsbury
pond in any direction save that which seemed to lead towards London.

This occurred on the very evening of that Friday which had witnessed the
Lady Arabella's last visit to Dr Thorne's house. The question of the
squire's necessary journey to the great fountains of justice was, of
course, discussed between Lady Arabella and Mr Gazebee; and it occurred
to the former, full as she was of Frank's iniquity and of Mary's
obstinacy, that if Frank were sent up in lieu of his father, it would
separate them at least for a while. If she could only get Frank away
withou