t seeing his love, she might yet so work upon him, by means of the
message which Mary had sent, as to postpone, if not break off, this
hateful match. It was inconceivable that a youth of twenty-three, and
such a youth as Frank, should be obstinately constant to a girl
possessed of no great beauty--so argued Lady Arabella to herself--and
who had neither wealth, birth, nor fashion to recommend her.

And this it was at last settled--the squire being a willing partner to
the agreement--that Frank should go up and be badgered in lieu of his
father. At his age it was possible to make a thing desirable, if not
necessary--on account of the importance conveyed--to sit day after day
in the chambers of Messrs Slow & Bideawhile, and hear musty law talk,
and finger dusty law parchments. The squire had made many visits to
Messrs Slow & Bideawhile, and he knew better. Frank had not hitherto
been there on his own bottom, and thus he fell easily into the trap.

Mr Oriel was also going to London, and this was another reason for
sending Frank. Mr Oriel had business of great importance, which it was
quite necessary that he should execute before his marriage. How much of
this business consisted in going to his tailor, buying a wedding-ring,
and purchasing some other more costly present for Beatrice, we need not
here inquire. But Mr Oriel was quite on Lady Arabella's side with
reference to this mad engagement, and as Frank and he were now fast
friends, some good might be done in that way. 'If we all caution him
against it, he can hardly withstand us all!' said Lady Arabella to
herself.

The matter was broached to Frank on the Saturday evening, and settled
between them all on the same night. Nothing, of course, was at that
moment said about Mary; but Lady Arabella was too full of the subject to
let him go to London without telling him that Mary was ready to recede
if only he would allow her to do so. About eleven o'clock, Frank was
sitting in his own room, coming over the difficulties of the
situation--thinking of his father's troubles, his own position--when he
was roused from his reverie by a slight tap at the door.

'Come in,' he said somewhat loudly.  He thought it was one of his
sisters, who were apt to visit him at all hours and for all manner of
reasons; and he, though he was usually gentle to them, was not at
present exactly in a humour to be disturbed.

The door gently opened, and he saw his mother standing hesitating in the
passage.

'Can I come in, Frank?' said she.

'Oh, yes, mother; by all means:' and then, with some surprise marked in
his countenance, he prepared a seat for her. Such a visit as this from
Lady Arabella was very unusual; so much so, that he had probably not
seen her in his own room since the day when he first left school. He had
nothing, however, to be ashamed of; nothing to conceal unless it were an
open letter from Miss Dunstable which he had in his hand when she
entered, and which he somewhat hurriedly thrust into his pocket.

'I wanted to say a few words to you, Frank, before you start for London
about this business.' Frank signified by a gesture, that he was quite
ready to listen to her.

'I am so glad to see your father putting the matter into your hands. You
are younger than he is; and then--I don't know why, but somehow your
father has never been a good man of business--everything has gone wrong
with him.'

'Oh, mother!  do not say anything against him.'

'No, Frank, I will not; I do not wish it.  Things have been unfortunate,
certainly. Ah me! I little thought when I married--but I don't mean to
complain--I have excellent children, and I ought to be thankful for
that.'

Frank began to fear that no good would be coming when his mother spoke
in that strain. 'I will do the best I can,' said he, 'up in town. I
can't help thinking myself that Mr Gazebee might have done as well,
but--'

'Oh, dear no; by no means.  In such cases the principal must show
himself. Besides, it is right you should know how matters stand. Who is
so much interested in it as you are? Poor Frank! I do so often feel for
you when I think how the property has dwindled.'

'Pray do not mind me, mother.  Why should you talk of it as my matter
while my father is not yet forty-five? His life, so to speak, is as good
as mine. I can do very well without it; all I want is to be allowed to
settle to something.'

'You mean a profession.'

'Yes; something of that sort.'

'They are all so slow, dear Frank.  You, who speak French so well--I
should think my brother might get you in as an attache to some embassy.'

'That wouldn't suit me at all,' said Frank.

'Well, we'll talk about that some other time.  But I came about
something else, and I do hope you will hear me.'

Frank's brow again grew black, for he knew that his mother was about to
say something which it would be disagreeable for him to hear.

'I was with Mary, yesterday.'

'Well, mother?'

'Don't be angry with me, Frank; you can't but know that the fate of an
only son must be a subject of anxiety to a mother.' Ah! how singularly
altered was Lady Arabella's tone since first she had taken upon herself
to discuss the marriage prospects of her son! Then how autocratic had
she been as she went him away, bidding him, with full command, to throw
himself into the golden embraces of Miss Dunstable! But now, how humble,
as she came suppliantly to his room, craving that she might have leave
to whisper into his ear a mother's anxious fears! Frank had laughed at
her stern behests, though he had half obeyed them; but he was touched to
the heart by her humility.

He drew his chair nearer to her, and took her by the hand.  But she,
disengaging hers, parted the hair from off his forehead, and kissed his
brow. 'Oh, Frank,' she said, 'I have been so proud of you, am still so
proud of you. It will send me to my grave if I see you sink below your
proper position. Not that it will be your fault. I am sure it will not
be your fault. Only circumstanced as you are, you should be doubly,
trebly, careful. If your father had not--'

'Do not speak against my father.'

'No, Frank; I will not--no, I will not; not another word.  And now,
Frank--'

Before we go on we must say one word further as to Lady Arabella's
character. It will probably be said that she was a consummate hypocrite;
but at the present moment she was not hypocritical. She did love her
son; was anxious--very, very anxious for him; was proud of him, and
almost admired the obstinacy which so vexed her inmost soul. No grief
would be to her so great as that of seeing him sink below what she
conceived to be his position. She was as genuinely motherly, in wishing
that he should marry money, as another woman might be in wishing to see
her son a bishop; or as the Spartan matron, who preferred that her
offspring should return on his shield, to hearing that he had come back
whole in limb but tainted in honour. When Frank spoke of a profession,
she instantly thought of what Lord de Courcy might do for him. If he
would not marry money, he might, at any rate, be attache at an embassy.
A profession--hard work, as a doctor, or as an engineer--would,
according to her ideas, degrade him; cause him to sink below his proper
position; but to dangle at a foreign court, to make small talk at
evening parties of a lady ambassadress, and occasionally, perhaps, to
write demi-official notes containing demi-official tittle-tattle; this
would be in proper accordance with the high honour of a Gresham of
Greshamsbury.

We may not admire the direction taken by Lady Arabella's energy on
behalf of her son, but that energy was not hypocritical.

'And now, Frank--' She looked wistfully into his face as she addressed
him, as though half afraid to go on, and begging that he would receive
with complaisance whatever she found herself forced to say.

'Well, mother?'

'I was with Mary yesterday.'

'Yes, yes; what then?  I know what your feelings are with regard to
her.'

'No, Frank; you wrong me.  I have no feelings against her--none, indeed;
none but this: that she is not fit to be your wife.'

'I think her fit.'

'Ah, yes; but how fit?  Think of your position, Frank, and what means
you have of keeping her. Think of what you are. Your father's only son;
the heir to Greshamsbury. If Greshamsbury be ever again more than a
name, it is you that must redeem it. Of all men living you are the least
able to marry a girl like Mary Thorne.'

'Mother, I will not sell myself for what you call my position.'

'Who asks you?  I do not ask you; nobody asks you.  I do not want you to
marry any one. I did think once--but let that pass. You are now
twenty-three. In ten years' time you will still be a young man. I only
ask you to wait. If you marry now, that is, marry such a girl as Mary
Thorne--'

'Such a girl!  Where shall I find another?'

'I mean as regards money, Frank; you know I mean that; how are you to
live? Where are you to go? And then, her birth. Oh, Frank, Frank!'

'Birth!  I hate such pretence.  What was--but I won't talk about it.
Mother, I tell you my word is pledged, and on no account will I be
induced to break it.'

'Ah, that's just it; that's just the point.  Now, Frank, listen to me.
Pray listen to me patiently for one minute.'

Frank promised that he would listen patiently; but he looked anything
but patient as he said so.

'I have seen Mary, as it was certainly my duty to do.  You cannot be
angry with me for that.'

'Who said that I was angry, mother?'

'Well, I have seen her, and I must own, that though she was not disposed
to be courteous to me, personally, she said much that marked her
excellent good sense. But the gist of it was this; that as she had made
you a promise, nothing should turn her from that promise but your
permission.'

'And do you think--'

'Wait a moment, Frank, and listen to me.  She confessed that this
marriage was one which would necessarily bring distress on all your
family; that it was one which would probably be ruinous to yourself;
that it was a match which could not be approved of: she did, indeed; she
confessed all that. "I have nothing", she said--those were her own
words--"I have nothing to say in favour of this engagement, except that
he wishes it." That is what she thinks of it herself. "His wishes are
not a reason; but a law," she said--'

'And, mother, would you have me desert such a girl as that?'

'It is not deserting, Frank: it would not be deserting: you would be
doing that which she herself approves of. She feels the impropriety of
going on; but she cannot draw back because of her promise to you. She
thinks that she cannot do it, even though she wishes it.'

'Wishes it!  Oh, mother!'

'I do believe she does, because she has sense to feel the truth of all
that your friends say. Oh, Frank, I will go on my knees to you if you
will listen to me.'

'Oh, mother! mother! mother!'

'You should think twice, Frank, before you refuse the only request your
mother ever made you. And why do I ask you? why do I come to you thus?
Is it for my own sake? Oh, my boy! my darling boy! will you lose
everything in life, because you love the child with whom you played with
as a child?'

'Whose fault is it that we were together as children?  She is now more
than a child. I look on her already as my wife.'

'But she is not your wife, Frank; and she knows that she ought not to
be. It is only because you hold her to it that she consents to it.'

'Do you mean to say that she does not love me?'

Lady Arabella would probably have said this, also, had she dared; but
she felt that in doing so, she would be going too far. It was useless
for her to say anything that would be utterly contradicted by an appeal
to Mary herself.

'No, Frank; I do not mean to say that you do not love her.  What I do
mean is this: that it is not becoming in you to give up everything--not
only yourself, but all your family--for such a love as this; and that
she, Mary herself acknowledges this. Every one is of the same opinion.
Ask your father: I need not say that he would agree with you about
everything he could. I will not say the De Courcys.'

'Oh, the De Courcys!'

'Yes, they are my relations, I know that.' Lady Arabella could not quite
drop the tone of bitterness which was natural to her in saying this.
'But ask your sisters; ask Mr Oriel, whom you esteem so much; ask your
friend Harry Baker.'

Frank sat silent for a moment or two while his mother, with a look
almost of agony, gazed into his face. 'I will ask no one,' at last he
said.

'Oh, my boy! my boy!'

'No one but myself can know my heart.'

'And you will sacrifice all to such a love as that, all; her, also, whom
you say that you so love? What happiness can you give her as your wife?
Oh, Frank! is that the only answer you will make to your mother on her
knees?

'Oh, mother! mother!'

'No, Frank, I will not let you ruin yourself; I will not let you destroy
yourself. Promise this, at least, that you will think of what I have
said.'

'Think of it!  I do think of it.'

'Ah, but think of it in earnest.  You will be absent now in London; you
will have the business of the estate to manage; you will have heavy
cares upon your hands. Think of it as a man, and not as a boy.'

'I will see her to-morrow before I go.'

'No, Frank, no; grant me that trifle, at any rate.  Think upon this
without seeing her. Do not proclaim yourself so weak that you cannot
trust yourself to think over what your mother says to you without asking
her leave. Though you be in love, do not be childish with it. What I
have told you as coming from her is true, word for word; if it were not,
you would soon learn so. Think now of what I have said, and of what she
says, and when you come back from London, then you can decide.'

To so much Frank consented after some further parley; namely, that he
would proceed to London on the following Monday morning without again
seeing Mary. And in the meantime, she was waiting with sore heart for
his answer to that letter that was lying, and was still to lie for so
many hours, in the safe protection of Silverbridge postmistress.

It may seem strange; but, in truth, his mother's eloquence had more
effect on Frank than that of his father: and yet, with his father he had
always sympathized. But his mother had been energetic; whereas, his
father, if not lukewarm, had, at any rate, been timid. 'I will ask no
one,' Frank had said in the strong determination of his heart; and yet
the words were hardly out of his mouth before he bethought himself that
he would talk the thing over with Harry Baker. 'Not,' said he to
himself, 'that I have any doubt: I have no doubt; but I hate to have all
the world against me. My mother wishes me to ask Harry Baker. Harry is a
good fellow, and I will ask him.' And with this resolve he betook
himself to bed.

The following day was Sunday.  After breakfast Frank went with the
family to church, as was usual; and there, as usual, he saw Mary in Dr
Thorne's pew. She, as she looked at him, could not but wonder why he had
not answered the letter which was still at Silverbridge; and he
endeavoured to read into her face whether it was true, as his mother
told him, that she was quite ready to give him up. The prayers of both
of them were disturbed, as is so often the case with the prayers of
other anxious people.

There was a separate door opening from the Greshamsbury pew out into the
Greshamsbury grounds, so that the family were not forced into unseemly
community with the village multitude in going to and from their prayers;
for the front door of the church led out into a road which had no
connexion with the private path. It was not unusual with Frank and his
father to go round, after the service, to the chief entrance, so that
they might speak to their neighbours, and get rid of some of the
exclusiveness which was intended for them. On this morning the squire
did so; but Frank walked home with his mother and sisters, so that Mary
saw no more of him.

I have said that he walked home with his mother and sisters; but he
rather followed in their path. He was not inclined to talk much, at
least, not to them; and he continued asking himself the
question--whether it could be possible that he was wrong in remaining
true to his promise? Could it be that he owed more to his father and his
mother, and what they chose to call his position, than he did to Mary?

After church, Mr Gazebee tried to get hold of him, for there was still
much to be said, and many hints to be given, as to how Frank should
speak, and, more especially, as to how to hold his tongue among the
learned pundits in and about Chancery Lane. 'You must be very wide awake
with Messrs Slow and Bideawhile,' said Mr Gazebee. But Frank would not
hearken to him just at that moment. He was going to ride over to Harry
Baker, so he put Mr Gazebee off till the half-hour before dinner,--or
else the half-hour after tea.

On the previous day he had received a letter from Miss Dunstable, which
he had hitherto read but once. His mother had interrupted him as he was
about to refer to it; and now, as his father's nag was being saddled--he
was still prudent in saving the black horse--he again took it out.

Miss Dunstable had written in excellent humour.  She was in great
distress about the oil of Lebanon, she said. 'I have been trying to get
a purchaser for the last two years; but my lawyer won't let me sell it,
because the would-be purchasers offer a thousand pounds or so less than
the value. I would give ten to get rid of the bore; but I am as little
able to act myself as Sancho was in his government. The oil of Lebanon!
Did you hear anything of it when you were in those parts? I thought of
changing the name to "London particular"; but my lawyers says the
brewers would bring an action against me.'

'I was going down to your neighbourhood--to your friend the duke's, at
least. But I am prevented by my poor doctor, who is so weak that I must
take him to Malvern. It is a great bore; but I have the satisfaction
that I do my duty by him!

'Your cousin George is to be married at last.  So I hear, at least.  He
loves wisely, if not well; for his widow has the name of being prudent
and fairly well to do in the world. She has got over the caprices of her
youth. Dear Aunt De Courcy will be so delighted. I might perhaps have
met her at Gatherum Castle. I do so regret it.

'Mr Moffat has turned up again.  We all thought you had finally
extinguished him. He left a card the other day, and I have told the
servant always to say that I am at home, and that you are with me. He is
going to stand for some borough in the west of Ireland. He's used to
shillelaghs by this time.

'By the by, I have a cadeau for a friend of yours.  I won't tell you
what it is, nor permit you to communicate the fact. But when you tell me
that in sending it I may fairly congratulate her on having so devoted a
slave as you, it shall be sent.

'If you have nothing better to do at present, do come and see my invalid
at Malvern. Perhaps you might have a mind to treat for the oil of
Lebanon. I'll give you all the assistance I can in cheating my lawyers.'

There was not much about Mary in this; but still, the little that was
said made him again declare that neither father nor mother should move
him from his resolution. 'I will write to her and say that she may send
her present when she pleases. Or I will run down to Malvern for a day.
It will do me good to see her.' And so he resolved, he rode away to Mill
Hill, thinking, as he went, how he would put the matter to Harry Baker.

Harry was at home; but we need not describe the whole interview.  Had
Frank been asked beforehand, he would have declared, that on no possible
subject could he have had the slightest hesitation in asking Harry any
question, or communicating to him any tidings. But when the time came,
he found that he did hesitate much. He did not want to ask his friend if
he should be wise to marry Mary Thorne. Wise or not, he was determined
to do that. But he wished to be quite sure that his mother was wrong in
saying that all the world would dissuade him from it. Miss Dunstable, at
any rate, did not do so.

At last, seated on a stile at the back of the Mill Hill stables, while
Harry stood close before him with both his hands in his pockets, he did
get his story told. It was by no means the first time that Harry Baker
had heard about Mary Thorne, and he was not, therefore, so surprised as
he might have been, had the affair been new to him. And thus, standing
there in the position we have described, did Mr Baker, junior, give
utterance to such wisdom as was in him on this subject.

'You see, Frank, there are two sides to every question; and, as I take
it, fellows are so apt to go wrong because they are so fond of one side,
they won't look at the other. There's no doubt about it, Lady Arabella
is a very clever woman, and knows what's what; and there's no doubt
about this either, that you have a very ticklish hand of cards to play.'

'I'll play it straightforward; and that's my game' said Frank.

'Well and good, my dear fellow.  That's the best game always. But what
is straightforward? Between you and me, I fear there's no doubt that
your father's property has got into a deuce of a mess.'

'I don't see that that has anything to do with it.'

'Yes, but it has.  If the estate was all right, and your father could
give you a thousand a year to live on without feeling it, and if your
eldest child would be cock-sure of Greshamsbury, it might be very well
that you should please yourself as to marrying at once. But that's not
the case; and yet Greshamsbury is too good a card to be flung away.'

'I could fling it away to-morrow,' said Frank.

'Ah! you think so,' said Harry the Wise.  'But if you were to hear
to-morrow that Sir Louis Scatcherd were master of the whole place, and
be d--d to him, you would feel very uncomfortable.' Had Harry known how
near Sir Louis was to his last struggle, he would not have spoken of him
in this manner. 'That's all very fine talk, but it won't bear wear and
tear. You do care for Greshamsbury if you are the fellow I take you to
be: care for it very much; and you care too much for your father being
Gresham of Greshamsbury.'

'This won't affect my father at all.'

'Ah, but it will affect him very much.  If you were to marry Miss Thorne
to-morrow, there would at once be an end to any hope to save your
property.'

'And do you mean to say I'm to be a liar to her for such reasons as
that? Why, Harry, I should be as bad as Moffat. Only it would be ten
times more cowardly, as she has no brother.'

'I must differ from you there altogether; but mind, I don't mean to say
anything. Tell me that you have made up your mind to marry her, and I'll
stick to you through thick and thin. But if you ask my advice, why, I
must give it. It is quite a different affair to that of Moffat's. He had
lots of tin, everything he could want, and there could be no reason why
he should not marry,--except that he was a snob, of whom your sister was
well quit. But this is very different. If I, as your friend, were to put
it to Miss Thorne, what do you think she would say herself?'

'She would say whatever was best for me.'

'Exactly: because she is a trump.  And I say the same.  There can be no
doubt about it, Frank, my boy: such a marriage would be very foolish for
you both; very foolish. Nobody can admire Miss Thorne more than I do;
but you oughtn't to be a marrying man for the next ten years, unless you
get a fortune. If you tell her the truth, and if she's the girl I take
her to be, she'll not accuse you of being false. She'll peak for a
while; and so will you, old chap. But others have had to do that before
you. They have got over it and so will you.'

Such was the spoken wisdom of Harry Baker, and who can say that he was
wrong? Frank sat a while on his rustle seat, paring his nails with his
penknife, and then looking up, he thus thanked his friend:-

'I'm sure you mean well, Harry; and I'm much obliged to you. I dare say
you're right too. But, somehow, it doesn't come home to me. And what is
more, after what has passed, I could not tell her that I wish to part
from her. I could not do it. And besides, I have that sort of feeling,
that if I heard she was to marry any one else, I am sure I would blow
his brains out. Either his or my own.'

'Well, Frank, you may count on me for anything, except the last
proposition:' and so they shook hands, and Frank rode back to
Greshamsbury.



CHAPTER XLV

LAW BUSINESS IN LONDON

On the Monday morning at six o'clock, Mr Oriel and Frank started
together; but early as it was, Beatrice was up to give them a cup of
coffee, Mr Oriel having slept that night in the house. Whether Frank
would have received the coffee from his sister's fair hands had not Mr
Oriel been there, may be doubted. He, however, loudly asserted that he
should not have done so, when she laid claim to great merit for rising
on his behalf.

Mr Oriel had been specially instigated by Lady Arabella to use the
opportunity of their joint journey, for pointing out to Frank the
iniquity as well as madness of the course he was pursuing; and he had
promised to obey her ladyship's request. But Mr Oriel was perhaps not an
enterprising man, and was certainly not a presumptuous one. He did
intend to do as he was bid; but when he began, with the object of
leading up to the subject of Frank's engagement, he always softened down
into some much easier enthusiasm in the matter of his own engagement
with Beatrice. He had not that perspicuous, but not over-sensitive
strength of mind which had enabled Harry Baker to express his opinion
out at once; and boldly as he did it, yet to do so without offence.

Four times before the train arrived in London, he made some little
attempt; but four times he failed. As the subject was matrimony, it was
his easiest course to begin about himself; but never could he get any
further.

'No man was ever more fortunate in a wife than I shall be,' he said,
with a soft, euphuistic self-complacency, which would have been silly
had it been adopted to any other person than the bride's brother. His
intention, however, was very good, for he meant to show, that in his
case marriage was prudent and wise, because his case differed so widely
from that of Frank.

'Yes,' said Frank.  'She is an excellent good girl:' he had said it
three times before, and was not very energetic.

'Yes, and so exactly suited to me; indeed, all that I could have dreamed
of. How very well she looked this morning! Some girls only look well at
night. I should not like that at all.'

'You mustn't expect her to look like that always at six o'clock a.m.,'
said Frank, laughing. 'Young ladies only take that trouble on very
particular occasions. She wouldn't have come down like that if my father
or I had been going alone. No, and she won't do that for you in a couple
of years' time.'

'Oh, but she's always nice.  I have seen her at home as much almost as
you could do; and then she's so sincerely religious.'

'Oh, yes, of course; that is, I am sure she is,' said Frank, looking
solemn as became him.

'She's made to be a clergyman's wife.'

'Well, so it seems,'said Frank.

'A married life, I'm sure, the happiest in the world--if people are only
in a position to marry,' said Mr Oriel, gradually drawing near to the
accomplishment of his design.

'Yes; quite so.  Do you know, Oriel, I never was so sleepy in my life.
What with all that fuss of Gazebee's, and one thing and another, I could
not get to bed till one o'clock; and then I couldn't sleep. I'll take a
snooze now, if you won't think it uncivil.' And then, putting his feet
on the opposite seat, he settled himself comfortably to his rest. And so
Mr Oriel's last attempt for lecturing Frank in the railway-carriage
faded away and was annihilated.

By twelve o'clock Frank was with Messrs Slow & Bideawhile.  Mr
Bideawhile was engaged at the moment, but he found the managing Chancery
clerk to be a very chatty gentleman. Judging from what he saw, he would
have said that the work to be done at Messrs Slow & Bideawhile's was not
very heavy.

'A singular man that Sir Louis,' said the Chancery clerk.

'Yes; very singular,' said Frank.

'Excellent security; no better; and yet he will foreclose; but you see
he has no power himself. But the question is, can the trustee refuse?
Then, again, trustees are so circumscribed nowadays that they are afraid
to do anything. There has been so much said lately, Mr Gresham, that a
man doesn't know where he is, or what he is doing. Nobody trusts
anybody. There have been such terrible things that we can't wonder at
it. Only think of the case of those Hills! How can any one expect that
any one else will ever trust a lawyer again after that? But that's Mr
Bideawhile's bell. How can one expect it? He will see you now, I dare
say, Mr Gresham.'

So it turned out, and Frank was ushered into the presence of Mr
Bideawhile. He had got his lesson by heart, and was going to rush into
the middle of his subject; such a course, however, was not in accordance
with Mr Bideawhile's usual practice. Mr Bideawhile got up from his large
wooden-seated Windsor chair, and, with a soft smile, in which, however,
was mingled some slight dash of the attorney's acuteness, put out his
hand to his young client; not, indeed, as though he were going to shake
hands with him, but as though the hand were some ripe fruit all but
falling, which his visitor might take and pluck if he thought proper.
Frank took hold of the hand, which returned no pressure, and then let it
go again, not making any attempt to gather the fruit.

'I have come up to town, Mr Bideawhile, about this mortgage.'

'Mortgage--ah, sit down, Mr Gresham; sit down.  I hope your father is
quite well?'

'Quite well, thank you.'

'I have a great regard for your father.  So I had for your grandfather;
a very good man indeed. You, perhaps, don't remember him, Mr Gresham?'

'He died when I was only a year old.'

'Oh, yes; no, you of course, can't remember him; but I do well: he used
to be very fond of some port wine I had. I think it was "11"; and if I
don't mistake, I have a bottle or two of it yet; but it is not worth
drinking now. Port wine, you know, won't keep beyond a certain time.
That was very good wine. I don't exactly remember what it stood me a
dozen then; but such wine can't be had now. As for the Madeira, you know
there's an end of that. Do you drink Madeira, Mr Gresham?'

'No,' said Frank, 'not very often.'

'I'm sorry for that, for it's a fine wine; but then there's none of it
left, you know. I have a few dozen, I'm told they're growing pumpkins
where the vineyards were. I wonder what they do with all the pumpkins
they grow in Switzerland! You've been to Switzerland, Mr Gresham?'

Frank said he had ben in Switzerland.

'It's a beautiful country; my girls made me go there last year. They
said it would do me good; but then you know, they wanted to see it
themselves; ha! ha! ha! However, I believe I shall go again this autumn.
That is to Aix, or some of those places; just for three weeks. I can't
spare any more time, Mr Gresham. Do you like that dining at the tables
d'hote?'

'Pretty well, sometimes.'

'One would get tired of it--eh!  But they gave us capital dinners at
Zurich. I don't think much of their soup. But they had fish, and about
seven kinds of meats and poultry, and three or four puddings, and things
of that sort. Upon my word, I thought we did very well, and so did my
girls, too. You see a great many ladies travelling now.'

'Yes,' said Frank; 'a great many.'

'Upon my word, I think they are right; that is, if they can afford time.
I can't afford time. I'm here every day till five, Mr Gresham; then I go
out and dine in Fleet Street, and then back to work till nine.'

'Dear me! that's very hard.'

'Well, yes it is hard work.  My boys don't like it; but I manage
somehow. I get down to my little place in the country on Saturday. I
shall be most happy to see you there next Saturday.'

Frank, thinking it would be outrageous on his part to take up much of
the time of the gentleman who was constrained to work so unreasonably
hard, began again to talk about his mortgages, and, in so doing, had to
mention the name of Mr Yates Umblelby.

'Ah, poor Umblelby!' said Mr Bideawhile; 'what is he doing now?  I am
quite sure your father was right, or he wouldn't have done it; but I
used to think that Umbleby was a decent sort of man enough. Not so
grand, you know, as your Gazebees and Gumptions--eh, Mr Gresham? They do
say young Gazebee is thinking of getting into Parliament. Let me see:
Umbleby married--who was it he married? That was the way your father got
hold of him; not your father, but your grandfather. I used to know all
about it. Well, I was sorry for Umbleby. He has got something, I
suppose--eh?'

Frank said that he believed Mr Yates Umbleby had something wherewith to
keep the wolf from the door.

'So you have got Gazebee down there now?  Gumption, Gazebee & Gazebee:
very good people, I'm sure; only, perhaps, they have a little too much
on hand to do your father justice.'

'But about Sir Louis Scatcherd, Mr Bideawhile.'

'Well, about Sir Louis; a very bad sort of fellow, isn't he? Drinks--eh?
I knew his father a little. He was a rough diamond, too. I was once down
in Northamptonshire, about some railway business; let me see; I almost
forget whether I was with him, or against him. But I know he made sixty
thousand pounds by one hour's work; sixty thousand pounds! And then he
got so mad with drinking that we all thought--'

And so Mr Bideawhile went on for two hours, and Frank found no
opportunity of saying one word about the business which had brought him
up to town. What wonder that such a man as this should be obliged to
stay at his office every night till nine o'clock?

During these two hours, a clerk had come in three or four times,
whispering something to the lawyer, who, on the last of such occasions,
turned to Frank, saying, 'Well, perhaps that will do for to-day. If
you'll manage to call to-morrow, say about two, I will have the whole
thing looked up; or, perhaps Wednesday or Thursday would suit you
better.' Frank, declaring that the morrow would suit him very well, took
his departure, wondering much at the manner in which business was done
at the house of Messrs Slow and Bideawhile.

When he called the next day, the office seemed to be rather disturbed,
and he was shown quickly into Mr Bideawhile's room. 'Have you heard
this?' said that gentleman, putting a telegram into his hands. It
contained tidings of the death of Sir Louis Scatcherd. Frank immediately
knew that these tidings must be of importance to his father; but he had
no idea how vitally they concerned his own more immediate interests.

'Dr Thorne will be up in town on Thursday evening after the funeral,'
said the talkative clerk. 'And nothing of course can be done till he
comes,' said Mr Bideawhile. And so Frank, pondering on the mutability of
human affairs, again took his departure.

He could do nothing now but wait for Dr Thorne's arrival, and so he
amused himself in the interval by running down to Malvern, and treating
with Miss Dunstable in person for the oil of Lebanon. He went down on
the Wednesday, and thus, failed to receive, on the Thursday morning,
Mary's letter, which reached London on that day. He returned, however,
on the Friday, and then got it; and perhaps it was well for Mary's
happiness that he had seen Miss Dunstable in the interval. 'I don't care
what your mother says,' said she, with emphasis. 'I don't care for any
Harry, whether it be Harry Baker or old Harry himself. You made her a
promise, and you are bound to keep it; if not on one day, then on
another. What! because you cannot draw back yourself, get out of it by
inducing her to do so! Aunt de Courcy herself could not improve upon
that.' Fortified in this manner, he returned to town on the Friday
morning, and then got Mary's letter. Frank also got a note from Dr
Thorne, stating that he had taken up his temporary domicile at the
Gray's Inn Coffee-house, so as to be near the lawyers.

It has been suggested that the modern English writers of fiction should
among them keep a barrister, in order that they may be set right on such
legal points as will arise in their little narratives, and thus avoid
the exposure of their own ignorance of the laws, which, now, alas! they
too often make. The idea as worthy of consideration, and I can only say,
that if such an arrangement can be made, and if a counsellor adequately
skilful can be found to accept the office, I shall be happy to subscribe
my quota; it would be but a modest tribute towards the cost.

But as the suggestion has not yet been carried out, and as there is at
present no learned gentleman whose duty would induce him to set me
right, I can only plead for mercy if I be wrong allotting all Sir
Roger's vast possessions in perpetuity to Miss Thorne, alleging also, in
excuse, that the course of my narrative absolutely demands that she
shall be ultimately recognized as Sir Roger's undoubted heiress.

Such, after a not immoderate delay, was the opinion expressed to Dr
Thorne by his law advisers; and such, in fact, turned out to be the
case. I will leave the matter so, hoping that my very absence of defence
may serve to protect me from severe attack. If under such a will as that
described as having been made by Sir Roger, Mary would not have been the
heiress, that will must have been described wrongly.

But it was not quite at once that those tidings made themselves
absolutely certain to Dr Thorne's mind; nor was he able to express any
such opinion when he first met Frank in London. At that time Mary's
letter was in Frank's pocket; and Frank, though his real business
appertained much more to the fact of Sir Louis's death, and the effect
that would immediately have on his father's affairs, was much more full
of what so much more nearly concerned himself. 'I will show it Dr Thorne
himself,' said he, 'and ask him what he thinks.'

Dr Thorne was stretched fast asleep on the comfortless horse-hair sofa
in the dingy sitting-room at the Gray's Inn Coffee-house when Frank
found him. The funeral, and his journey to London, and the lawyers had
together conquered his energies, and he lay and snored, with nose
upright, while heavy London summer flies settled on his head and face,
and robbed his slumbers of half their charms.

'I beg your pardon,' said he, jumping up as though he had been detected
in some disgraceful act. 'Upon my word, Frank, I beg your pardon;
but--well, my dear fellow, all well at Greshamsbury--eh?' and as he
shook himself, he made a lunge at one uncommonly disagreeable fly that
had been at him for the last ten minutes. It is hardly necessary to say
that he missed his enemy.

'I should have been with you before, doctor, but I was down at Malvern.'

'At Malvern, eh?  Ah!  so Oriel told me.  The death of poor Sir Louis
was very sudden--was it not?'

'Very.'

'Poor fellow--poor fellow!  His fate has for some time been past hope.
It is a madness, Frank; the worst of madness. Only think of it--father
and son! And such a career as the father had--such a career as the son
might have had!'

'It has been very quickly run,' said Frank.

'May it be all forgiven him!  I sometimes cannot but believe in a
special Providence. That poor fellow was not able, never would have been
able, to make proper use of the means which fortune had given him. I
hope they may fall into better hands. There is no use in denying it, his
death will be an immense relief to me, and a relief also to your father.
All this law business will now, of course, be stopped. As for me, I hope
I may never be trustee again.'

Frank had put his hand four or five times into his breast-pocket, and
had as often taken out and put back again Mary's letter before he could
find himself able to bring Dr Thorne to the subject. At last there was a
lull in the purely legal discussion, caused by the doctor intimating
that he supposed Frank would now soon return to Greshamsbury.

'Yes; I shall go to-morrow morning.'

'What! so soon as that?  I counted on having you one day in London with
me.'

'No, I shall go to-morrow.  I'm not fit for company for any one.  Nor am
I fit for anything. Read that, doctor. It's no use putting it off any
longer. I must get you to talk this over with me. Just read that, and
tell me what you think about it. It was written a week ago, but somehow
I have only got it to-day.' And putting the letter into the doctor's
hands, he turned away to the window, and looked out among the Holborn
omnibuses. Dr Thorne took the letter and read it. Mary, after she had
written it, had bewailed to herself that the letter was cold; but it had
not seemed cold to her lover, nor did it appear so to her uncle. When
Frank turned round from the window, the doctor's handkerchief was up to
his eyes; who, in order to hide the tears that were there, was obliged
to go through a rather violent process of blowing his nose.

'Well,' he said, as he gave back the letter to Frank.

Well!  what did well mean?  Was it well? or would it be well were he,
Frank, to comply with the suggestion made to him by Mary?

'It is impossible,' he said, 'that matters should go on like that. Think
what her sufferings must have been before she wrote that. I am sure she
loves me.'

'I think she does,' said the doctor.

'And it is out of the question that she should be sacrificed; nor will I
consent to sacrifice my own happiness. I am quite willing to work for my
bread, and I am sure that I am able. I will not submit to--Doctor, what
answer do you think I ought to give to that letter? There can be no
person so anxious for her happiness as you are--except myself.' And as
he asked the question, he again put into the doctor's hands, almost
unconsciously, the letter which he had still been holding in his own.

The doctor turned it over and over, and then opened it again.

'What answer ought I to make to it?' demanded Frank, with energy.

'You see, Frank, I have never interfered in this matter, otherwise than
to tell you the whole truth about Mary's birth.'

'Oh, but you must interfere: you should say what you think.'

'Circumstanced as you are now--that is, just at the present moment--you
could hardly marry immediately.'

'Why not let me take a farm?  My father could, at any rate, manage a
couple of thousand pounds or so for me to stock it. That would not be
asking much. If he could not give it me, I would not scruple to borrow
so much elsewhere.' And Frank bethought him of all Miss Dunstable's
offers.

'Oh, yes; that could be managed.'

'Then why not marry immediately; say in six months or so?  I am not
unreasonable; though, Heaven knows, I have been kept in suspense long
enough. As for her, I am sure she must be suffering frightfully. You
know her best, and, therefore, I ask you what answer I ought to make: as
for myself, I have made up my own mind; I am not a child, nor will I let
them treat me as such.'

Frank, as he spoke, was walking rapidly about the room; and h brought
out his different positions, one after the other, with a little pause,
while waiting for the doctor's answer. The doctor was sitting, with the
letter still in his hands, on the head of the sofa, turning over in his
mind the apparent absurdity of Frank's desire to borrow two thousand
pounds for a farm, when, in all human probability, he might in a few
months be in possession of almost any sum he should choose to name. And
yet he would not tell him of Sir Roger's will. 'If it should turn out to
be all wrong?' said he to himself.

'Do you wish me to give her up?' said Frank, at last.

'No.  How can I wish it?  How can I expect a better match for her?
Besides, Frank, I love no man in the world so well as I do you.'

'Then will you help me?'

'What! against your father?'

'Against! no, not against anybody.  But will you tell Mary she has your
consent?'

'I think she knows that.'

'But you have never said anything to her?'

'Look here, Frank; you ask me for my advice, and I will give it you: go
home, though, indeed, I would rather you went anywhere else.'

'No, I must go home; and I must see her.'

'Very well, go home: as for seeing Mary, I think you had better put it
off for a fortnight.'

'Quite impossible.'

'Well, that's my advice.  But, at any rate, make up your mind to nothing
for a fortnight. Wait for one fortnight, and I then will tell you
plainly--you and her too--what I think you ought to do. At the end of a
fortnight come to me, and tell the squire that I will take it as a great
kindness if he will come with you. She has suffered terribly, terribly;
and it is necessary that something should be settled. But a fortnight
can make no great difference.'

'And the letter?'

'Oh!  there's the letter.'

'But what shall I say?  Of course I shall write to her to-night.'

'Tell her to wait a fortnight.  And, Frank, mind you bring your father
with you.'

Frank could draw nothing further from his friend save constant
repetitions of this charge to him to wait a fortnight,--just one other
fortnight.

'Well, I will come to you at any rate,' said Frank; 'and, if possible, I
will bring my father. But I shall write to Mary to-night.'

On the Saturday morning, Mary, who was then nearly broken-hearted at her
lover's silence, received a short note:--

'MY OWN MARY

'I shall be home to-morrow.  I will by no means release you
from your promise. Of course you will perceive that I only 
got your letter to-day.'

Your own dearest, 
FRANK.'

Short as it was, this sufficed Mary.  It is one thing for a young lady
to make prudent, heart-breaking suggestions, but quite another to have
them accepted.  She did call him dearest Frank, even on that one day,
almost as often as he had desired her.



CHAPTER XLVI

OUR PET FOX FINDS A TAIL

Frank returned home, and his immediate business was of course with his
father, and with Mr Gazebee, who was still at Greshamsbury.

'But who is the heir?' asked Mr Gazebee, when Frank had explained that
the death of Sir Louis rendered unnecessary any immediate legal steps.

'Upon my word, I don't know,' said Frank.

'You saw Dr Thorne,' said the squire.  'He must have known.'

'I never thought of asking him,' said Frank, naively.

Mr Gazebee looked rather solemn.  'I wonder at that,' said he; 'for
everything depends on the hands the property will go into. Let me see; I
think Sir Roger had a married sister. Was not that so, Mr Gresham?' And
then it occurred for the first time, both to the squire and to his son,
that Mary Thorne was the eldest child of this sister. But it never
occurred to either of them that Mary could be the baronet's heir.

Dr Thorne came down for a couple of days before the fortnight was over
to see his patients, and then returned again to London. But during this
short visit he was utterly dumb on the subject of the heir. He called at
Greshamsbury to see Lady Arabella, and was even questioned by the squire
on the subject. But he obstinately refused to say anything more than
nothing certain could be known for a few days.

Immediately after his return, Frank saw Mary, and told her all that had
happened. 'I cannot understand my uncle,' said she, almost trembling as
she stood close to him in her own drawing-room. 'He usually hates
mysteries, and yet now he is so mysterious. He told me, Frank--that was
after I had written that unfortunate letter--'

'Unfortunate indeed!  I wonder what you really thought of me when you
were writing it?'

'If you had heard what your mother said, you would not be surprised.
But, after that, uncle said--'

'Said what?'

'He seemed to think--I don't remember what it was he said.  But he said,
he hoped that things might yet turn out well; and then I was almost
sorry that I had written the letter.'

'Of course you were sorry, and so you ought to have been.  To say that
you would never call me Frank again!'

'I didn't exactly say that.'

'I have told him that I will wait a fortnight, and so I will. After
that, I shall take the matter into my own hands.'

It may be supposed that Lady Arabella was not well pleased to learn that
Frank and Mary had been again together; and, in the agony of her spirit,
she did say some ill-natured things before Augusta, who had now returned
home from Courcy Castle, as to the gross impropriety of Mary's conduct.
But to Frank she said nothing.

Nor was there much said between Frank and Beatrice.  If everything could
really be settled at the end of that fortnight which was to witness the
disclosure of the doctor's mystery, there would still be time to arrange
that Mary should be at the wedding. 'It shall be settled then,' he said
to himself; 'and if it be settled, my mother will hardly venture to
exclude my affianced bride from the house.' It was now the beginning of
August, and it wanted yet a month to the Oriel wedding.

But though he said nothing to his mother or to Beatrice, he did say much
to his father. In the first place, he showed him Mary's letter. 'If your
heart be not made of stone it will be softened by that,' he said. Mr
Gresham's heart was not of stone, and he did acknowledge that the letter
was a very sweet letter. But we know how the drop of water hollows
stone. It was not by the violence of his appeal that Frank succeeded in
obtaining from his father a sort of half-consent that he would no longer
oppose the match; but by the assiduity with which the appeal was
repeated. Frank, as we have said, had more stubbornness of will than his
father; and so, before the fortnight was over, the squire had been
talked over, and promised to attend at the doctor's bidding.

'I suppose you had better take the Hazlehurst farm,' said he to his son,
with a sigh. 'It joins the park and the home-fields, and I will give you
them up also. God knows, I don't care about farming any more--or about
anything else either.'

'Don't say that, father.'

'Well, well!  But, Frank, where will you live?  The old house is big
enough for us all. But how would Mary get on with your mother?'

At the end of this fortnight, true to his time, the doctor returned to
the village. He was a bad correspondent; and though he had written some
short notes to Mary, he had said no word to her about his business. It
was late in the evening when he got home, and it was understood by Frank
and the squire that they were to be with him on the following morning.
Not a word had been said to Lady Arabella on the subject.

It was late in the evening when he got home, and Mary waited for him
with a heart almost sick with expectation. As soon as the fly had
stopped at the little gate she heard his voice, and heard at once that
it was quick, joyful, and telling much of inward satisfaction. He had a
good-natured word for Janet, and called Thomas an old blunder-head in a
manner that made Bridget laugh outright.

'He'll have his nose put out of joint some day; won't he?' said the
doctor. Bridget blushed and laughed again, and made a sign to Thomas
that he had better look to his face.

Mary was in his arms before he was yet within the door.  'My darling,'
said he, tenderly kissing her. 'You are my own darling yet awhile.'

'Of course I am.  Am I not always to be so?'

'Well, well; let me have some tea, at any rate, for I'm in a fever of
thirst. They may call that tea at the Junction if they will; but if
China were sunk under the sea it would make no difference to them.'

Dr Thorne always was in a fever of thirst when he got home from the
railway, and always made complaint as to tea at the Junction. Mary went
about her usual work with almost more than her usual alacrity, and so
they were soon seated in the drawing-room together.

She soon found that his manner was more than ordinarily kind to her; and
there was moreover something about him which seemed to make him sparkle
with contentment, but he said no word about Frank, nor did he make any
allusion to the business which had taken him up to town.

'Have you got through all your work?' she said to him once.

'Yes, yes; I think all.'

'And thoroughly?'

'Yes; thoroughly, I think.  But I am very tired, and so are you too,
darling, with waiting for me.'

'Oh, no, I am not tired,' said she, as she went on continually filling
his cup; 'but I am so happy to have you home again. You have been away
so much lately.'

'Ah, yes; well I suppose I shall not go away any more now.  It will be
somebody else