uck on the cheek,it's a duty to
turn the other side of the face, and take another blow, instead of seeking
revenge, whereby I understand-"

"That's enough !" shouted Hurry; "that's all I want,
to prove a man's doctrine! How long would it take to
kick a man through the colony-in at one ind and out at
the other, on that principle?"

"Don't mistake me, March," returned the young hunter,
with dignity; "I don't understand by this any more than
that it 's best to do this, if possible. Revenge is an Injin
gift, and forgiveness a white man's. That 's all. Overlook
all you can is what 's meant; and not revenge all you can.
As for kicking, Master Hurry," and Deerslayer's sunburnt
cheek flushed as he continued, "into the colony, or out of
the colony, that's neither here nor there, seeing no one
proposes it, and no one would be likely to put up with it.
What I wish to say is, that a redskin's scalping don't justify a pale-face's
scalping."

"Do as you 're done by, Deerslayer; that 's ever the
Christian parson's doctrine." No, Hurry, I 'ye asked the Moravians consarning
that;and it 's altogether different. 'Do as you would be done by,' they tell
me, is the true saying, while men practyse the false. They think all the
colonies wrong that offer bounties for scalps, and believe no blessing will
follow the measures. Above all things, they forbid revenge."

"That for your Moravians!" cried March, snapping his
fingers; "they 're the next thing to Quakers; and if you'd
believe all they tell you, not even a 'rat would be skinned,
out of marcy. Who ever heard of marcy on a muskrat!"

The disdainful manner of Hurry prevented a reply, and
he and the old man resumed the discussion of their plans in
a more quiet and confidential manner. This confidence
lasted until Judith appeared, bearing the simple but savory
supper. March observed, with a little surprise, that she
placed the choicest bits before Deerslayer, and that in the
little nameless attentions it was in her power to bestow, she quite obviously
manifested a desire to let it be seen that she deemed him the honored guest.
Accustomed, however, to Lhe waywardness and coquetry of the beauty, this
discovery gave him little concern, and he ate with an appetite that was in no
degree disturbed by any moral causes. The easily-digested food of the forests
offering the fewest possible obstacles to the gratification of this great
animal indulgence, Deerslayer, notwithstanding the hearty meal both had taken
in the woods, was in no manner behind his companion in doing justice to the
viands.

An hour later the scene had greatly changed. The lake
was still placid and glassy, but the gloom of the hour had
succeeded to the soft twilight of a summer evening, and all
within the dark setting of the woods lay in the quiet repose
of night. The forests gave up no song, or cry, or even
murmur, but looked down from the hills on the lovely basin
they encircled, in solemn stillness; and the only sound that
was audible was the regular dip of the sweeps, at which
Hurry and Deerslayer lazily pushed, impelling the ark
towards the castle. Hutter had withdrawn to the stern of
the scow, in order to steer, but, finding that the young men
kept even strokes, and held the desired course by their own
skill, he permitted the oar to drag in the water, took a seat on the end of
the vessel, and lighted his pipe. He had not been thus placed many minutes,
ere Hetty came stealthily out of the cabin, or house, as they usually termed
that part of the ark, and placed herself at his feet, on a little bench  that
she brought with her. As this movement was by no
means unusual in his feeble-minded child, the old man paid
no other attention to it than to lay his hand kindly on her
head, in an affectionate and approving manner; an act of
grace that the girl received in meek silence.

After a pause of several minutes, Hetty began to sing.
Her voice was low and tremulous, but it was earnest and
solemn. The words and the tune were of the simplest form,
the first being a hymn that she had been taught by her
mother, and the last one of those natural melodies that find
favor with all classes, in every age, coming from and being
addressed to the feelings. Hutter never listened to this
simple strain without finding his heart and manner softened; facts that his
daughter well knew, and by which she had often profited, through the sort of
holy instinct that
enlightens the weak of mind, more especially in their aims
toward good.

Hetty's low, sweet tones had not been raised many
moments, when the dip of the oars ceased, and the holy
strain arose singly on the breathing silence of the wilder-
ness. As if she gathered courage with the theme, her pow-
ers appeared to increase as she proceeded; and though
nothing vulgar or noisy mingled in her melody, its strength
and melancholy tenderness grew on the ear, until the air
was filled with this simple homage of a soul that seemed
almost spotless. That the men forward were not indifferent
to this touching interruption, was proved by their inaction;
nor did their oars again dip until the last of the sweet sounds had actually
died among the remarkable shores, which, at that witching hour, would waft
even the lowest modulations of the human voice more than a mile. Hutter was
much affected; for rude as he was by early habits, and even ruthless as he
had got to be by long exposure to the practices of the wilderness, his nature
was of that fearful mixture of good and evil that so generally enters into
the moral composition of man.

"You are sad to-night, child," said the father, whose
manner and language usually assumed some of the gentle-
ness and elevation of the civilized life he had led in youth, when he thus
communed with this particular child; "we have just escaped from enemies, and
ought rather to
rejoice."

"You can never do it, father!" said Hetty, in a low,
remonstrating manner, taking his hard, knotty hand into
both her own; "you have talked long with Harry March;
but neither of you have the heart to do it!"

"This is going beyond your means, foolish child; you
must have been naughty enough to have listened, or you
could know nothing of our talk."

"Why should you and Hurry kill people-especially
women and children?"

"Peace, girl, peace; we are at war, and must do to our
enemies as our enemies would do to us."

"That 's not it, father! I heard Deerslayer say how it
was. You must do to your enemies as you wish your enemies
would do to you. No man wishes his enemies to kill him."

"We kill our enemies in war, girl, lest they should kill
us. One side or the other must begin; and them that begin
first, are most apt to get the victory. You know nothing
about these things, poor Hetty, and had best say nothing."

"Judith says it is wrong, father; and Judith has sense
though I have none."

"Jude understands better than to talk to me of these
matters; for she has sense, as you say, and knows I '11 not
bear it. Which would you prefer, Hetty; to have your own
scalp taken, and sold to the French, or that we should kill
our enemies, and keep them from harming us?"

"That 's not it, father! Don't kill them, nor let them
kill us. Sell your skins, and get more, if you can; but
don't sell human blood."

"Come, come, child; let us talk of matters you under-
stand. Are you glad to see our old friend, March, back
again? You like Hurry, and must know that one day he
may be your brother-if not something nearer."

"That can't be, father," returned the girl, after a consid-
erable pause; "Hurry has had one father, and one mother;
and people never have two."

"So much for your weak mind, Hetty. When Jude
marries, her husband's father will be her father, and her
husband's sister her sister. If she should marry Hurry,
then he will be your brother."

"Judith will never have Hurry," returned the girl mildly.
but positively; "Judith don't like Hurry."
"That's more than you can know, Hetty. Harry March
is the handsomest, and the strongest, and the boldest young
man that ever visits the lake; and, as Jude is the greatest
beauty, I don't see why they shouldn't come together. He
has as much as promised that he will enter into this job with me, on
condition that I'11 consent."

Hetty began to move her body back and forth, and other-
wise to express mental agitation; but she made no answer
for more than a minute. Her father, accustomed to her
manner, and suspecting no immediate cause of concern, con-
tinued to smoke with the apparent phlegm which would
seem to belong to that particular species of enjoyment.

"Hurry is handsome, father," said Hetty, with a simple
emphasis, that she might have hesitated about using, had
her mind been more alive to the inferences of others.

"I told you so, child," muttered old Hutter, without
removing the pipe from between his teeth; "he's the
likeliest youth in these parts; and Jude is the likeliest
young woman I've met with since her poor mother was
in her best days."

"Is it wicked to be ugly, father?'"

"One might be guilty of worse things-but you 're by no
means ugly; though not so comely as Jude."

"Is Judith any happier for being so handsome?"

"She may be, child, and she may not be. But talk of
other matters now, for you hardly understand these, poor
Hetty. How do you like our new acquaintance, Deer-
slayer?"

"He isn't handsome, father. Hurry is far handsomer than Deerslayer."

"That's true; but they say he is a noted hunter! His
fame had reached me before I ever saw him; and I did hope
he would prove to be as stout a warrior as he is dexterous
with the deer. All men are not alike, howsever, child; and
it takes time, as I know by experience, to give a man a true
wilderness heart."

"Have I got a wilderness heart, father-and Hurry, is
his heart true wilderness?"

"You sometimes ask queer questions, Hetty! Your
heart is good, child, and fitter for the settlements than for the woods;
while your reason is fitter for the woods than for the settlements."

"Why has Judith more reason than I, father?"

"Heaven help thee, child: this is more than I can an-
swer God gives sense, and appearance, and all these
things; and he grants them as he seeth fit. Dost thou
wish for more sense?"

"Not I. The little I have troubles me; for when I
think the hardest, then I feel the unhappiest. I don't
believe thinking is good for me, though I do wish I was as
handsome as Judith !"

"Why so, poor child? Thy sister's beauty may cause
her trouble, as it caused her mother before her. It's no
advantage, Hetty, to be so marked for anything as to her
come an object of envy, or to be sought after more than
others."

"Mother was good, if she was handsome," returned the
girl, the tears staffing to her eyes, as usually happened
when she adverted to her deceased parent.	Old Hutter, if not
equally affected, was moody and silent at this allusion to his wife.
He continued smoking, without appearing disposed to make any answer,
until his simple-minded daughter repeated her remark, in a way to
show that she felt uneasiness lest he might be inclined to deny
her assertion. Then he knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and
laying his hand in a sort of rough kindness on the girl's
head, he made a reply.

"Thy mother was too good for this world," he said;
"though others might not think so. Her good looks did
not befriend her; and you have no occasion to mourn that
you are not as much like her as your sister. Think less of
beauty, child, and more of your duty, and you '11 be as
happy on this lake as you could be in the king's palace."

"I know it, father; but Hurry says beauty is everything
in a young woman."

Hutter made an ejaculation expressive of dissatisfaction,
and went forward, passing through the house, in order to
do so. Hetty's simple betrayal of her weakness in behalf
of March gave him uneasiness on a subject concerning
which he had never felt before, and he determined to come
to an explanation at once with his visitor; for directness
of speech and decision in conduct were two of the best
qualities of this rude being, in whom the seeds of a better
education seemed to be constantly struggling upwards, to
be choked by the fruits of a life in which his hard struggles
 for subsistence and security had steeled his feelings and
indurated his nature. When he reached the forward end of the
scow, he manifested an intention to relieve Deerslayer at
the oar, directing the latter to take his own place aft By
these changes, the old man and Hurry were again left alone,
while the young hunter was transferred to the other end of the ark.

Hetty had disappeared when Deerslayer reached his new
post, and for some little time he directed the course of the
slow-moving craft by himself. It was not long, however,
before Judith came out of the cabin, as if disposed to do
the honors of the place to a stranger engaged in the service
of her family. The starlight was sufficient to permit objects
to be plainly distinguished when near at hand, and the bright
eyes of the girl had an expression of kindness in them, when
they met those of the youth, that the latter was easily enabled
to discover. Her rich hair shaded her spirited and yet soft
countenance, even at that hour rendering it the more beautiful-
as the rose is loveliest when reposing amid the shadows and
contrasts of its native foliage. Little ceremony is used in
the intercourse of the woods; and Judith had acquired a
readiness of address, by the admiration that she so generally
excited, which, if it did not amount to forwardness, certainly
in no degree lent to her charms the aid of that retiring modesty
on which poets love to dwell.

"I thought I should have killed myself with laughing,
Deerslayer," the beauty abruptly, but coquettishly com-
menced, when I saw that Indian dive into the river! He
was a good-looking savage, too," the girl always dwelt on
personal beauty as a sort of merit, "and yet one could n't
stop to consider whether his paint would stand water!"

"And I thought they would have killed you with their
we'pons, Judith," returned Deerslayer; "it was an awful
risk for a female to run in the face of a dozen Mingos!"

"Did that make you come out of the cabin, in spite of
their rifles, too?" asked the girl, with more real interest
than she would have cared to betray, though with an indif-
ference of manner that was the result of a good deal of prac
tice united to native readiness.

"Men ar'n't apt to see females in danger, and not come
to their assistance. Even a Mingo knows that."

This sentiment was uttered with as much simplicity of
wanner as of feeling, and Judith rewarded it with a smile so
that literally knew no guile. To answer without saying
more or less than he wished, was consequently a delicate
duty.

"March has his say of all things in whether of
fri'nd or foe," slowly and cautiously rejoined the hunter.
"He's one of them that speak as they feel while the
tongue's a-going, and that's sometimes different from what
they'd speak if they took time to consider. Give me a
Delaware, Judith, for one that reflects and ruminates on his
idees! Inmity has made him thoughtful, and a loose
tongue is no ricommend at their council fires."


"I dare say March's tongue goes free enough when it gets
on the subject of Judith Hutter and her sister," said the
girl, rousing herself as if in careless disdain. "Young
women's good names are a pleasant matter of discourse with
some that would n't dare be so open-mouthed if there was a
brother in the way. Master March may find it pleasant to
traduce us, but sooner or later he '11 repent.

"Nay, Judith, this is taking the matter up too much in
'arnest. Hurry has never whispered a syllable ag'in the
good name of Hetty, to begin with-"

"I see how it is-I see how it is," impetuously interrupted
Judith. "I am the one he sees fit to scorch with his
withering tongue! Hetty, indeed! Poor Hetty!" she
continued, her voice sinking into low, husky tones, that
seemed nearly to stifle her in the utterance; "she is beyond
and above his slanderous malice! Poor Hetty! If God has
created her feeble-minded, the weakness lies altogether on
the side of errors of which she seems to know nothing. The
earth never held a purer being than Hetty Hutter,
Deerslayer."

 "I can believe it-yes, I can believe that, Judith, and I
 hope 'arnestly that the same can be said of her handsome
 sister."

There was a soothing sincerity in the voice of Deerslayer,
which touched the girl's feelings; nor did the allusion to
her beauty lessen the effect with one who only knew too
well the power of her personal charms. Nevertheless, the
still, small voice of conscience was not hushed, and it prompted the
answer which she made, after giving herself time to reflect.

"I can believe it-yes, I can believe tha, Judith, and I
hope 'arnestly that the same can be said of her handsome
sister."

There was a soothing sincerity in the voice of Deerslayer,
which touched the girl's feelings; nor did the allusion
to her beauty lessen the effect with one who only knew
too well the power of her personal charms. Nevertheless,
the still, small voice of conscience was not hushed, and
it prompted the answer which she made after giving herself
time to reflect.

"I dare say Hurry had some of his vile hints about the
people of the garrisons," she added. "He knows they are
gentlemen, and can never forgive any one for being what he
feels he can never become himself."

"Not in the sense of a king's officer, Judith, sartainly,
for March has no turn thataway; but in the sense of reality,
why may not a beaver-hunter be as respectable as a governor?
Since you speak of it yourself, I'11 not deny that he did
complain of one as humble as you being so much in the
company of scarlet coats and silken sashes. But 't was jeal-
ousy that brought it out of him, and I do think he mourned
over his own thoughts as a mother would have mourned
over her child."

Perhaps Deerslayer was not aware of the full meaning
that his earnest language conveyed. It is certain that he
did not see the color that crimsoned the whole of Judith's
fine face, nor detect the uncontrollable distress that
immediately after changed its hue to deadly paleness.
A minute or two elapsed in profound stillness, the splash
of the water seeming to occupy all the avenues of sound;
and then Judith arose, and grasped the hand of the hunter,
almost convulsively, with one of her own.

"Deerslayer," she said, hurriedly, "I'm glad the ice is
broke between us. They say that sudden friendships lead
to long enmities, but I do not believe it will turn out so
with us. I know not how it is-but you are the first man I
ever met, who did not seem to wish to flatter-to wish my
ruin-to be an enemy in disguise-never mind; say nothing to
Hurry, and another time we '11 talk together again."


As the girl released her grasp, she vanished in the house,
leaving the astonished young man standing at the steering-
oar, as motionless as one of the pines on the hills. So
abstracted, indeed, had his thoughts become, that he was
hailed by Hutter to keep the scow's head in the right
direction, before he remembered his actual situation.




CHAPTER VI

"So spake the apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair.'
Paradise lost, I.125-26.

Shortly after the disappearance of Judith, a light southerly
air arose, and Hutter set a large square sail, that had once
been the flying top-sail of an Albany sloop, but which having
become threadbare in catching the breezes of Tappan, had been
condemned and sold. He had a light, tough spar of tamarack that
he could raise on occasion, and with a little contrivance, his
duck was spread to the wind in a sufficiently professional
manner. The effect on the ark was such as to supersede the
necessity of rowing; and in about two hours the castle was seen,
in the darkness, rising out of the water, at the distance
of a hundred yards. The sail was then lowered, and by slow degrees
the scow drifted up to the building, and was secured. No one
had visited the house since Hurry and his com­panion left it.
The place was found in the quiet of midnight, a sort of type
of the solitude of a wilderness. As an enemy was known to be
near, Hutter directed his daughters to abstain from the use of
lights, luxuries in which they seldom indulged during the warm
months, lest they might prove beacons to direct their foes where
they might be found.

"In open daylight I shouldn't fear a host of savages behind these
stout logs, and they without any cover to skulk into," added Hutter,
when he had explained to his guests the reasons why he forbade the
use of light; "for I 'ye three or four trusty weapons always loaded,
and Killdeer, in particular, is a piece that never misses But it's a
different thing at night. A canoe might get upon us unseen, in the
dark; and the savages have so many cunning ways of attacking, that
I look upon it as bad enough to deal with 'em under a bright sun.
I built this dwelling in order to have 'em at arm's length, in case
we should ever get to blows again. Some people think it's too open
and exposed, but I'm for anchoring out here, clear of underbrush
and thickets, as the surest means of making a safe berth."

"You was once a sailor, they tell me, old Tom?" said Hurry, in his
abrupt manner, struck by one or two express­ions that the other had
just used, "and some people believe you could give us strange accounts
of inimies and ship­wrecks, if you 'd a mind to come out with all you know?"

"There are people in this world, Hurry," returned the other, evasively,
"who live on other men's thoughts; and some such often find their way
into the woods. What I 'ye been, or what I 'ye seen in youth, is of
less matter now than what the savages are. It 's of more account to find
out what will happen in the next twenty-four hours than to talk over
what happened twenty-four years since."

"That's judgment, Deerslayer; yes, that's sound judg­ment. Here's Judith
and Hetty to take care of, to say nothing of our own top-knots; and,
for my part, I can sleep as well in the dark as I could under a noonday
sun. To me it's no great matter whether there is light or not, to see
to shut my eyes by."

As Deerslayer seldom thought it necessary to answer his companion's
peculiar vein of humor, and Hutter was evidently indisposed to dwell
longer on the subject, it's dis­cussion ceased with this remark. The
latter had something more on his mind, however, than recollections.
His daugh­ters had no sooner left them, with an expressed intention of
going to bed, than he invited his two companions to follow him again
into the scow. Here the old man opened his pro­ject, keeping back the
portion that he had reserved for execution by Hurry and himself.

"The great object for people posted like ourselves is to command the
water," he commenced. "So long as there is no other craft on the lake,
a bark canoe is as good as a man of-war, since the castle will not be
easily taken by swimming. Now, there are but five canoes remaining in
these parts, two of which are mine, and one is Hurry's. These three
we have with us here; one being fastened in the canoe-dock beneath
the house, and the other two being alongside the scow. The other
canoes are housed on the shore, in hollow logs, and the savages,
who are such venomous enemies, will leave no likely place unexamined
in the morning, if they 're serious in s'arch of bounties-"

"Now, friend Hutter," interrupted Hurry, "the Indian don't live that
can find a canoe that is suitably wintered. I 'ye done something at
this business before now, and Deer­slayer here knows that I am one that
can hide a craft in such a way that I can't find it myself."

"Very true, Hurry," put in the person to whom the appeal had been made,
"but you overlook the sarcumstance that if you could n't see the trail
of the man who did the job, I could. I 'm of Master Hutter's mind, that
it 's far wiser to mistrust a savage's ingenuity, than to build any
great expectations on his want of eye-sight. If these two canoes can
be got off to the castle, therefore, the sooner it 's done the better."

"Will you be of the party that's to do it?" demanded Hutter, in a way
to show that the proposal both surprised and pleased him.

"Sartain. I 'm ready to enlist in any enterprise that 's not ag'in a
white man's lawful gifts. Natur' orders us to defend our lives, and
the lives of others, too, when there 's occasion and opportunity.
I '11 follow you, Floating Tom, into the Mingo camp, on such an arr'nd,
and will strive to do my duty, should we come to blows; though, never
having been tried in battle, I don't like to promise more than I may
be able to perform. We all know our wishes, but none know their might
till put to the proof."

"That's modest and suitable, lad," exclaimed Hurry. "You've never yet
heard the crack of an angry rifle; and, let me tell you, 't is as
different from the persuasion of one of your venison speeches, as the
laugh of Judith Hutter, in her best humor, is from the scolding of a
Dutch house keeper on the Mohawk. I don't expect you'll prove much of
a warrior, Deerslayer, though your equal with the bucks and the does
don't exist in all these parts. As for the ra'al sarvice, however,
you'll turn out rather rearward, according to my consait."

"We'll see, Hurry, we '11 see," returned the other, meekly; so far as
human eye could discover, not at all disturbed by these expressed doubts
concerning his conduct on a point on which men are sensitive, precisely
in the degree that they feel the consciousness of demerit; "having never
been tried, I '11 wait to know, before I form any opinion of myself; and
then there '11 be sartainty, instead of bragging. I've beard of them that
was valiant afore the fight, who did little in it; and of them that waited
to know their own tempers, and found that they were n't as bad as some
expected, when put to the proof."

"At any rate, we know you can use a paddle, young man," said Hutter, "and
that 's all we shall ask of you to­night. Let us waste no more time, but
get into the canoe, and do, in place of talking."

As Hutter led the way, in the execution of his project, the boat was
soon ready, with Hurry and Deerslayer at the paddles. Before the old
man embarked himself, however, he held a conference of several minutes
with Judith, entering the house for that purpose; then, returning, he
took his place in the canoe, which left the side of the ark at the next
instant.

Had there been a temple reared to God, in that solitary wilderness, its
clock would have told the hour of midnight as the party set forth on their
expedition. The darkness had increased, though the night was still clear,
and the light of the stars sufficed for all the purposes of the adventurers.
Hutter alone knew the places where the canoes were hid, and he directed the
course, while his two athletic companions raised and dipped their paddles
with proper caution, lest the sound should be carried to the ears of their
enemies, across that sheet of placid water, in the stillness of deep night.
But the bark was too light to require any extraordinary efforts, and skill
supplying the place of strength, in about half an hour they were approaching
the shore, at a point near a league from the castle.

"Lay on your paddles, men," said Hutter, in a low voice, "and let us look
about us for a moment. We must now be all eyes and ears, for these vermin
have noses like blood­hounds."

The shores of the lake were examined closely, in order to discover any
glimmering of light that might have been left in a camp; and the men
strained their eyes, in the obscurity, to see if some thread of smoke
was not still stealing along the mountain-side, as it arose from the
dying embers of a fire. Nothing unusual could be traced; and as the
position was at some distance from the outlet, or the spot where the
savages had been met, it was thought safe to land. The paddles were
plied again, and the bows of the canoe ground upon the gravelly beach
with a gentle motion, and a sound barely audible. Hutter and Hurry
immediately landed, the former carrying his own and his friend's rifle,
leaving Deerslayer in charge of the canoe. The hollow log lay a little
distance up the side of the mountain, and the old man led the way towards
it, using so much caution as to stop at every third or fourth step, to
listen if any tread betrayed the presence of a foe. The same death-like
stillness, however, reigned on the midnight scene, and the desired place
was reached without an occur­rence to induce alarm.

"This is it," whispered Hutter, laying a foot on the trunk of a fallen
linden; "hand me the paddles first, and draw the boat out with care, for
the wretches may have left it for a bait, after all."

"Keep my rifle handy, butt towards me, old fellow," answered March.
"If they attack me loaded, I shall want to unload the piece at 'em, at
least. And feel if the pan is full."

"All 's right," muttered the other; "move slow, when you get your load,
and let me lead the way."

The canoe was drawn out of the log with the utmost care, raised by
Hurry to his shoulder, and the two began to 'return to the shore, moving
but a step at a time, lest they should tumble down the steep declivity.
The distance was not great, but the descent was extremely difficult; and,
towards the end of their little journey, Deerslayer was obliged to land
and meet them, in order to aid in lifting the canoe through the bushes.
With his assistance the task was successfully accomplished, and the light
craft soon floated by the side of the other canoe. This was no sooner done,
than all three turned anxiously towards the forest and the mountain,
expecting an enemy to break out of the one, or to come rushing down the
other. Still the silence was unbroken, and they all embarked with the
caution that had been used in coming ashore.

Hutter now steered broad off towards the centre of the lake. Having got
a sufficient distance from the shore, he cast his prize loose, knowing
that it would drift slowly up the lake before the light southerly air,
and intending to find it on his return. Thus relieved of his tow, the
old man held his way down the lake, steering towards the very point
where Hurry had made his fruitless attempt on the life of the deer.
As the distance from this point to the outlet was less than a mile, it
was like entering an enemy's country; and redoubled caution became
necessary. They reached the extremity of the point, however, and landed
in safety on the little gravelly beach already mentioned. Un­like the
last place at which they had gone ashore, here was no acclivity to ascend,
the mountains looming up in the darkness quite a quarter of a mile
farther west, leaving a margin of level ground between them and the
strand. The point itself, though long, and covered with tall trees, was
nearly flat, and for some distance only a few yards in width. Hutter and
Hurry landed as before, leaving their companion in charge of the boat.


In this instance, the dead tree that contained the canoe of which they
had come in quest lay about half-way be. between the extremity of the narrow
slip of land and the place where it joined the main shore; and knowing that
there was water so near him on his left, the old man led the way along the
eastern side of the belt with some confidence walking boldly, though still
with caution. He had landed at the point expressly to get a glimpse into the
bay. and to make certain that the coast was clear; otherwise he would have
come ashore directly abreast of the hollow tree. There was no difficulty in
finding the latter, from which the canoe was drawn as before, and instead
of carrying it down to the place where Deerslayer lay, it was launched at
the nearest favorable spot. As soon as it was in the water, Hurry entered
it, and paddled round to the point, whither Hutter also proceeded, following
the beach. As the three men had now in their possession all the boats on
the lake, their confidence was greatly increased, and there was no longer
the same feverish desire to quit the shore, or the same necessity for
extreme caution. Their position on the ex­tremity of the long, narrow bit of
land, added to the feeling of security, as it permitted an enemy to approach
in only one direction, that in their front, and under circumstances that
would render discovery, with their habitual vigilance, almost certain. The
three now landed together, and stood grouped in consultation on the gravelly
point.

"We 'ye fairly tree'd the scamps," said Hurry, chuckling at their success;
"if they wish to visit the castle, let 'em wade or swim! Old Tom, that idee
of your'n, in burrow­ing out in the lake, was high proof, and carries a fine
bead. There be men who would think the land safer than the water; but, after
all, reason shows it isn't; the beaver, and rats, and other l'arned creatur's
taking to the last when hard pressed. I call our position now, entrenched,
and set the Can adas at defiance."

"Let us paddle along this south shore," said Hutter, "and see if there 's no
sign of an encampment; but, first, let me have a better look into the bay,
for no one has been far enough round the inner shore of the point to make
suit of that quarter yet."

As Hutter ceased speaking, all three moved in the direction he had named.
Scarce had they fairly opened the bottom of the bay, when a general start
proved that their eyes had lighted on a common object at the same instant. It
was no more than a dying brand, giving out its flickering and failing light;
but at that hour, and in that place, it
was at once as conspicuous as "a good deed in a naughty world." There was not
a shadow of doubt that this fire had been kindled at an encampment of the
Indians. The situ­ation, sheltered from observation on all sides but one, and
even on that except for a very short distance, proved that more care had been
taken to conceal the spot than would be used for ordinary purposes, and
Hutter, who knew that a spring was near at hand, as well as one of the best
fishing-stations on the lake, immediately inferred that this encamp­ment
contained the women and children of the party.

"That's not a warrior's encampment," he growled to Hurry; "and there 's
bounty enough sleeping round that fire to make a heavy division of head-
money. Send the lad to the canoes, for there '11 come no good of him in such
an onset, and let us take the matter in hand at once, like men."
"There 's judgment in your notion, old Tom, and I like it to the backbone.
Deerslayer, do you get into the canoe, lad, and paddle off into the lake with
the spare one, and set it adrift, as we did with the other; after which you
can float along shore, as near as you can get to the head of the bay, keeping
outside the point, howsever, and outside the rushes, too. You can hear us
when we want you; and if there's any delay, I '11 call like a loon-yes, that
'll do it- the call of a loon shall be the signal. If you hear rifles, and
feel like sogering, why, you may close in, and see if you can make the same
hand with the savages that you do with the deer."

"If my wishes could be followed, this matter would not be undertaken, Hurry-"

"Quite true-nobody denies it, boy; but your wishes can't be followed; and
that inds the matter. So just canoe yourself off into the middle of the lake,
and by the time you get back there'11 be movements in that camp !"

The young man set about complying with great reluctance and a heavy heart. He
knew the prejudices of the frontiermen too well, however, to attempt a
remonstrance. The latter, indeed, under the circumstances, might prove
dangerous, as it would certainly prove useless. He paddled the canoe,
therefore, silently, and with the former caution, to a spot near the centre
of the placid sheet of water, and set the boat just recovered adrift, to
float towards the castle, before the light southerly air. This expedient had
been adopted, in both cases, under the certainty that the drift could not
carry the light barks more than a league or two, before the return of light,
when they might easily be overtaken In order to prevent any wandering savage
from using them, by swimming off and getting possession, a possible but
scarcely a probable event, all the paddles were retained.

No sooner had he set the recovered canoe adrift, than Deerslayer turned the
bows of his own towards the point on the shore that had been indicated by
Hurry. So light was the movement of the little craft, and so steady the sweep
of its master's arm, that ten minutes had not elapsed ere it was again
approaching the land, having, in that brief time, passed over fully half a
mile of distance. As soon as Deer-slayer's eye caught a glimpse of the
rushes, of which there were many growing in the water a hundred feet from the
shore, he arrested the motion of the canoe, and anchored his boat by holding
fast to the delicate but tenacious stem of one of the drooping plants. Here
he remained, awaiting, with an intensity of suspense that can be easily
imagined, the result of the hazardous enterprise.

It would be difficult to convey to the minds of those who have never
witnessed it, the sublimity that characterizes the silence of a solitude as
deep as that which now reigned over the Glimmerglass. In the present
instance, this sublimity was increased by the gloom of night, which threw its
shadowy and fantastic forms around the lake, the forest, and the hills. It is
not easy, indeed, to conceive of any place more favorable to heighten these
natural impressions, than that Deerslayer now occupied. The size of the lake
brought all within the reach of human senses, while it displayed so much of
the imposing scene at a single view, giv­ing up, as it might be, at a glance,
a sufficiency to produce the deepest impressions. As has been said, this was
the first lake Deerslayer had ever seen. Hitherto, his experience was at once
as conspicuous as "a good deed in a naughty world." There was not a shadow of
doubt that this fire had been kindled at an encampment of the Indians. The
situation sheltered from observation on all sides but one, and even on that
except for a very short distance, proved that more care had been taken to
conceal the spot than would be used for ordinary purposes, and Hutter, who
knew that a spring was near at hand, as well as one of the best fishing
stations on the lake, immediately inferred that this encamp­ment contained
the women and children of the party.

"That's not a warrior's encampment," he growled to Hurry; "and there 's
bounty enough sleeping round that fire to make a heavy division of head-
money. Send the lad to the canoes, for there '11 come no good of him in such
an onset, and let us take the matter in hand at once, like men."

"There 's judgment in your notion, old Tom, and I like it to the backbone.
Deerslayer, do you get into the canoe, lad, and paddle off into the lake with
the spare one, and set it adrift, as we did with the other; after which you
can float along shore, as near as you can get to the head of the bay, keeping
outside the point, howsever, and outside the rushes, too. You can hear us
when we want you; and if there's any delay, I '11 call like a loon-yes, that
'11 do it- the call of a loon shall be the signal. If you hear rifles, and
feel like sogering, why, you may close in, and see if you can make the same
hand with the savages that you do with the deer.""

"If my wishes could be followed, this matter would not be undertaken, Hurry-"

"Quite true-nobody denies it, boy; but your wishes can't be followed; and
that inds the matter. So just canoe yourself off into the middle of the lake,
and by the time you get back there '11 be movements in that camp."

The young man set about complying with great reluctance and a heavy heart. He
knew the prejudices of the frontiermen too well, however, to attempt a
remonstrance. the latter, indeed, under the circumstances, might prove
dangerous, as it would certainly prove useless. He paddled the canoe,
therefore, silently, and with the former caution, to a spot near the centre
of the placid sheet of water, and set the boat just recovered adrift, to
float towards the castle, before the light southerly air. This expedient had
been adopted, in both cases, under the certainty that the drift could not
carry the light barks more than a league or two, before the return of light,
when they might easily be overtaken. In order to prevent any wandering savage
from using them, by swimming off and getting possession, a possible, but
scarcely a probable event, all the paddles were retained.

No sooner had he set the recovered canoe adrift, than Deerslayer turned the
bows of his own towards the point on the shore that had been indicated by
Hurry. So light was the movement of the little craft, and so steady the sweep
of its master's arm, that ten minutes had not elapsed ere it was again
approaching the land, having, in that brief time, passed over fully half a
mile of distance. As soon as Deer­slayer's eye caught a glimpse of the
rushes, of which there were many growing in the water a hundred feet from the
shore, he arrested the motion of the canoe, and anchored his boat by holding
fast to the delicate but tenacious stem of one of the drooping plants. Here
he remained, awaiting, with an intensity of suspense that can be easily
imagined, the result of the hazardous enterprise.

It would be difficult to convey to the minds of those who have never
witnessed it, the sublimity that characterizes the silence of a solitude as
deep as that which now reigned over the Glimmerglass. In the present
instance, this sublimity was increased by the gloom of night, which threw its
shadowy and fantastic forms around the lake, the forest, and the hills. It is
not easy, indeed, to conceive of any place more favorable to heighten these
natural impressions, than that Deerslayer now occupied. The size of the lake
brought all within the reach of human senses, while it dis­played so much of
the imposing scene at a single view, giv­ing up, as it might be, at a glance,
a sufficiency to produce the deepest impressions. As has been said, this was
the first lake Deerslayer had ever seen. Hitherto, his experience had been
limited to the courses of rivers and smaller streams, and never before had he
seen so much of that wilderness, which he so well loved, spread before his
gaze. Accustomed to the forest, however, his mind was capable of portraying
all its hidden mysteries, as he looked upon its leafy surface. This was also
the first time he had been on a trail where human lives depended on the
issue. His ears had often drunk in the traditions of frontier warfare, but he
had never yet been confronted with an enemy.

The reader will readily understand, therefore, how intense must have been the
expectation of the young man, as be sat in his solitary canoe, endeavoring to
catch the smallest sound that might denote the course of things on shore. His
training had been perfect, so far as theory could go, and his self-
possession, notwithstanding the high excitement, that was the fruit of
novelty, would have done credit to a veteran. The visible evidences of the
existence of the camp, or of the fire could not be detected from the spot
where the canoe lay, and he was compelled to depend on the sense of hearing
alone. He did not feel impatient, for the lessons he had heard taught him the
virtue of patience, and, most of all, inculcated the necessity of wariness in
conducting any covert assault on the Indians. Once he thought he heard the
cracking of a dried twig, but expectation was so intense it might mislead
him. In this manner minute after minute passed, until the whole time since he
left his companions was extended to quite an hour. Deerslayer knew not
whether to rejoice in or to mourn over this cautious delay, for, if it
augured security to his associates, it foretold destruction to the feeble and
innocent.

It might have been an hour and a half after his companions and he had parted,
when Deerslayer was aroused by a sound that filled him equally with concern
and surprise. The quavering call of a loon arose from the opposite side of
the lake, evidently at no great distance from its outlet. There was no
mistaking the note of this bird, which is so familiar to all who know the
sounds of the American lakes. Shrill, tremulous, loud, and sufficiently
prolonged, it seems the very cry of warning. It is often raised, also, at
night, an exception to the habits of most of the other feathered inmates of
the wilderness; a circumstance which had induced Hurry to select it as his
own signal. There had been sufficient time, certainly, for the two
adventurers to make their way by land from the point where they had been left
to that whence the call had come, but it was not proba­ble that they would
adopt such a course. Had the camp been deserted they would have summoned
Deerslayer to the shore, and, did it prove to be peopled, there could be no
sufficient motive for circling it, in order to re-embark at so great a
distance. Should he obey the signal, and be drawn away from the landing, the
lives of those who depended on him might be the forfeit-and, should he
neglect the call, on the supposition that it had been really made, the
conse­quences might be equally disastrous, though from a differ­ent cause. In
this indecision he waited, trusting that the call, whether feigned or
natural, would be speedily renewed. Nor was he mistaken. A very few minutes
elapsed before the same shrill warning cry was repeated, and from the same
part of the lake. This time, being on the alert, his senses were not
deceived. Although he had often heard admirable imitations of this bird, and
was no mean adept himself in raising its notes, he felt satisfied that Hurry,
to whose efforts in that way he had attended, could never so completely and
closely follow nature. He determined, therefore, to disre­gard that cry, and
to wait for one less perfect and nearer at hand.

Deerslayer had hardly come to this determination, when the profound stillness
of night and solitude was broken by a cry so startling, as to drive all
recollection of the more mel­ancholy call of the loon from the listener's
mind. It was a shriek of agony, that came either from one of the female sex,
or from a boy so young as not yet to have attained a manly voice. This appeal
could not be mistaken. Heart rending terror-if not writhing agony-was in the
sounds, and the anguish that had awakened them was as sudden as it was
fearful. The young man released his hold of the rush, and dashed his paddle
into the water; to do, he knew not what-to steer, he knew not whither. A very
few moments, however, removed his indecision. The breaking of branches, the
cracking of dried sticks, and the fall of feet were distinctly audible; the
sounds appearing to approach the water though in a direction that led
diagonally towards the shore, and a little farther north than the spot that
Deer­slayer had been ordered to keep near. Following this clue, the young man
urged the canoe ahead, paying but little attention to the manner in which he
might betray its presence. He had reached a part of the shore, where its
im­mediate bank was tolerably high and quite steep. Men were evidently
threshing through the bushes and trees on the summit of this bank, following
the line of the shore, as if those who fled sought a favorable place for
descending. Just at this instant five or six rifles flashed, and the
oppo­site hills gave back, as usual, the sharp reports in prolonged rolling
echoes. One or two shrieks, like those which escape the bravest when suddenly
overcome by unexpected anguish and alarm, followed; and then the threshing
among the bushes was renewed, in a way to show that man was grappling with
man.

"Slippery devil!" shouted Hurry with the fury of dis­appointment-" his skin's
greased! I sha'n't grapple! Take that for your cunning!"

The words were followed by the fall of some heavy object among the smaller
trees that fringed the bank, appearing to Deerslayer as if his gigantic
associate had hurled an enemy from him in this unceremonious manner. Again
the flight and pursuit were renewed, and then the young man saw a human form
break down the hill, and rush several yards into the water. At this critical
moment the canoe was just near enough to the spot to allow this movement,
which was accompanied by no little noise, to be seen, and feeling that there
he must take in his companion, if anywhere, Deer­slayer urged the canoe
forward to the rescue. His paddle had not been raised twice, when the voice
of Hurry was heard filling the air with imprecations, and he rolled on the
narrow beach, literally loaded down with enemies. While prostrate, and almost
smothered with his foes, the athletic frontierman gave his loon-call, in a
manner that would have excited laughter under circumstances less terrific.
The figure in the water seemed suddenly to repent his own flight, and rushed
to the shore to aid his companion, but was met and immediately overpowered by
half a dozen fresh pursuers, who, just then, came leaping down the bank.

"Let up, you painted riptyles-let up!" cried Hurry, too hard pressed to be
particular about the terms he used; "isn't it enough that I am withed like a
saw-log that ye must choke too!"

This speech satisfied Deerslayer that his friends were prisoners, and that to
land would be to share their fate He was already within a hundred feet of the
shore, when a few timely strokes of the paddle not only arrested his advance,
but forced him off to six or eight times that distance from his enemies.
Luckily for him, all of the Indians had dropped their rifles in the pursuit,
or this retreat might not have been effected with impunity; though no one had
noted the canoe in the first confusion of the melee.

"Keep off the land, lad," called out Hutter; "the girls depend only on you,
now; you will want all your caution to escape these savages. Keep off, and
God prosper you, as you aid my children!"

There was little sympathy in general between Hutter and the young man, but
the bodily and mental anguish with which this appeal was made served at the
moment to conceal from the latter the former's faults. He saw only the father
in his sufferings, and resolved at once to give a pledge of fidelity to its
interests, and to be faithful to his word.

"Put your heart at ease, Master Hutter," he called out; "the gals shall be
looked to, as well as the castle. The inimy has got the shore, 't is no use
to deny, but he hasn't got the water. Providence has the charge of all, and
no one can say what will come of it; but, if good-will can sarve you and your
'n, depend on that much. My exper'­ence is small, but my will is good."

"Ay, ay, Deerslayer," returned Hurry, in this stentorian voice, which was
losing some of its heartiness, notwith' standing,-" Ay, ay, Deerslayer. you
mean well enough

believed himself to have reached a point in a line with that where he had set
the last canoe adrift, he changed his direc­tion northward, keeping the light
air as nearly on his back as possible. After paddling a quarter of a mile in
this direc­tion, a dark object became visible on the lake, a little to the
right; and turning on one side for the purpose, he had soon secured his lost
prize to his own boat. Deerslayer now examined the heavens, the course of the
air, and the position of the two canoes. Finding nothing in either to induce
a change of plan, he lay down, and prepared to catch a few hours' sleep, that
the morrow might find him equal to its exigencies.

Although the hardy and the tired sleep profoundly, even in scenes of danger,
it was some time before Deerslayer lost his recollection. His mind dwelt on
what had passed, and his half-conscious faculties kept figuring the events of
the night, in a sort of waking dream. Suddenly he was up and alert, for he
fancied he heard the preconcerted signal of Hurry summoning him to the shore.
But all was still as the grave again. The canoes were slowly drifting
northward, the thoughtful stars were glimmering in their mild glory over his
head, and the forest-bound sheet of water lay embedded between its mountains,
as calm and melancholy as if never troubled by the winds, or brightened by a
noonday sun. Once more the loon raised his tremulous cry, near the foot of
the lake, and the mystery of the alarm was explained. Deerslayer adjusted his