t ag'in the savages?"

"I do; and a cruel errand it was! But what will you have? Men will be men,
and some even that flaunt in their gold and silver, and carry the King's
commission in their pockets, are not guiltless of equal cruelty." Judith's
eye again flashed, but by a desperate struggle she resumed her composure. "I
get warm when I think of all the wrong that men do," she added, affecting to
smile, an effort in which she only succeeded indifferently well. "All this is
silly. What is done is done, and it cannot be mended by complaints. But the
Indians think so little of the shedding of blood, and value men so much for
the boldness of their undertakings, that, did they know the business on which
their prisoners came, they would be more likely to honor than to injure them
for it."

"For a time, Judith; yes, I allow that, for a time. But when that feelin'
dies away, then will come the love of revenge. We must indivor, -Chingachgook
and I,-we must indivor to see what we can do to get Hurry and your father
free; for the Mingos will no doubt hover about this lake some days, in order
to make the most of their success."

"You think this Delaware can be depended on, Deer­slayer?" demanded the girl,
thoughtfully.

"As much as I can myself. You say you do not suspect me, Judith?"

"You!" taking his hand again, and pressing it between her own, with a warmth
that might have awakened the vanity of one less simple-minded, and more
disposed to dwell on his own good qualities, ' I would as soon suspect a
brother! I have known you but a day, Deerslayer, but it has awakened the
confidence of a year. Your name, how­ever, is not unknown to me; for the
gallants of the garrisons frequently speak of the lessons you have given them
in hunting, and all proclaim your honesty."

''Do they ever talk of the shooting, gal?" inquired the other eagerly, after,
however, laughing in a silent but heart­felt manner. "Do they ever talk of
the shooting? I want to hear nothing about my own, for if that is n't
sartified to by this time, in all these parts, there's little use in being
skilful and sure; but what do the officers say of their own-yes, what do they
say of their own? Arms, as they call it, is their trade, and yet there 's
some among 'em that know very little how to use 'em !"

"Such I hope will not be the case with your friend Chingachgook, as you call
him-what is the English of his Indian name?"

"Big Sarpent-so called for his wisdom and cunning, Uncas is his ra'al name-
all his family being called Uncas. until they get a title that has been
'arned by deeds."

"If he has all this wisdom, we may expect a useful friend in him, unless his
own business in this part of the country should prevent him from serving us."

"I see no great harm in telling you his arr'nd, a'ter all, and, as you may
find means to help us, I will let you and Hetty into the whole matter,
trusting that you '11 keep the secret as if it was your own. You must know
that Chin­gachgook is a comely Injin, and is much looked upon and admired by
the young women of his tribe, both on account of his family, and on account
of himself. Now, there is a chief that has a daughter called Wah-ta-Wah,
which is intarpreted into Hist-oh-Hist, in the English tongue, the rarest gal
among the Delawares, and the one most sought a'ter and craved for a wife by
all the young warriors of the nation. Well, Chingachgook, among others, took
a fancy to Wah-ta­Wab, and Wah-ta-Wah took a fancy to him." Here Deer­slayer
paused an instant; for, as lie got thus far in his tale, Hetty Hutter arose,
approached, and stood attentive at his knee, as a child draws near to listen
to the legends of its mother. "Yes, he fancied her, and she fancied him,"
resumed Deerslayer, casting a friendly and approving glance at the innocent
and interested girl; "and when that is the case, and all the elders are
agreed, it does not often happen that the young couple keep apart.
Chingachgook could n' t well carry off such a prize without making inimies
among them that wanted her as much as he did himself. A sartain Briarthorn,
as we call him in English, or Yocommon, as he is tarmed in Injin, took it
most to heart, and we mistrust him of having a hand in all that followed.
Wah-ta-Wah went with her father and mother, two moons ago, to fish for salmon
on the western streams, where it is agreed by all in these parts that fish
most abounds, and while thus empl'yed the gal vanished. For several weeks we
could get no tidings of her; but' here, ten days since, a runner, that came
through the Delaware country, brought us a message, by which we learn that
Wah-ta-Wah was stolen from her people, we think, but do not know it, by
Briarthorn's sarcumventions,-and that she was now with the inimy, who had
adopted her, and wanted her to marry a young Mingo. The message said that the
party intended to hunt and forage through this region for a month or two,
afore it went back into the Canadas, and that if we could contrive to get on
a scent in this quarter, something might turn up that would lead to our
getting the maiden off."

"And how does that concern you, Deerslayer?" demanded Judith, a little
anxiously.

"It consarns me, as all things that touches a fri'nd con­sarns a fri'nd. I 'm
here as Chingachgook's aid and helper, and if we can get the young maiden he
likes back ag'in, it will give me almost as much pleasure as if I had got
back my own sweetheart."

"And where, then, is your sweetheart, Deerslayer?"
"She 's in the forest, Judith-hanging from the boughs of the trees, in a soft
rain-in the dew on the open grass- the clouds that float about in the blue
heavens-the birds that sing in the woods-the sweet springs where I slake my
thirst-and in all the other glorious gifts that come from God's Providence!"

"You mean that, as yet, you've never loved one of my sex, but love best your
haunts, and your own manner of life."

"That's it-that's just it. I am white-have a white heart and can't, in
reason, love a red-skinned maiden, who must have a redskin heart and
feelin's. No, no, I 'm sound enough in them partic'lars, and hope to remain
so, at least till this war is over. I find my time too much taken up with
Chingachgook's affair, to wish to have one of my own on my hands afore that
is settled."


"The girl that finally wins you, Deerslayer, will at least win an honest
heart,-one without treachery or guile; and that will be a victory that most
of her sex ought to envy."

As Judith uttered this, her beautiful face had a resentful frown on it; while
a bitter smile lingered around a mouth that no derangement of the muscles
could render anything but handsome. Her companion observed the change, and
though little skilled in the workings of the female heart, he had sufficient
native delicacy to understand that it might be well to drop the subject.

As the hour when Chingachgook was expected still re­mained distant,
Deerslayer had time enough to examine into the state of the defences, and to
make such additional arrangements as were in his power, and the exigency of
the moment seemed to require. The experience and fore­sight of Hutter had
left little to be done in these particu­lars; still, several precautions
suggested themselves to the young man, who may be said to have studied the
art of frontier warfare, through the traditions and legends of the people
among whom he had so long lived. The dis­tance between the castle and the
nearest point on the shore, prevented any apprehension on the subject of
rifle-bullets thrown from the land. The house was within musket-shot in one
sense, it was true, but aim was entirely out of the question, and even Judith
professed a perfect disregard of any danger from that source. So long, then,
as the party re­mained in possession of the fortress, they were safe, unless
their assailants could find the means to come off and carry it by fire or
storm, or by some of the devices of Indian cunning and Indian treachery.
Against the first source of danger Hutter had made ample provision, and the
build­ing itself, the bark roof excepted, was not very combustible. The floor
was scuttled in several places, and buckets pro­vided with ropes were in
daily use, in readiness for any such emergency. One of the girls could easily
extinguish any fire that might be lighted, provided it had not time to make
much headway. Judith, who appeared to under­stand all her father's schemes of
defence, and who had the

into the building, when Deerslayer had ended his task, even allowing the
assailants the use of any tools but the axe, and to be unresisted. This
attention to security arose from Hutter's having been robbed once or twice by
the lawless whites of the frontiers, during some of his many absences from
home.

As soon as all was fast in the inside of the dwelling, Deerslayer appeared at
a trap, from which he descended into the canoe of Judith. When this was done,
he fastened the door with a massive staple and stout padlock. Hetty was then
received in the canoe, which was shoved outside of the palisadoes. The next
precaution was to fasten the gate, and the keys were carried into the ark.
The three were now fastened out of the dwelling, which could only be entered
by violence, or by following the course taken by the young man in quitting
it.
The glass had been brought outside as a preliminary step, and Deerslayer next
took a careful survey of the entire shore of the lake, as far as his own
position would allow. Not a living thing was visible, a few birds excepted,
and even the last fluttered about in the shades of the trees, as if unwilling
to encounter the heat of a sultry afternoon. All the nearest points, in
particular, were subjected to severe scrutiny, in order to make certain that
no raft was in prepa­ration; the result everywhere giving the same picture of
calm solitude. A few words will explain the greatest embarrassment belonging
to the situation of our party. Exposed themselves to the observation of any
watchful eyes, the movements of their enemies were concealed by the drapery
of a dense forest. While the imagination would be very apt to people the
latter with more warriors than it really contained, their own weakness must
be too apparent to all who might chance to cast a glance in their direction.

Nothing is stirring, howsever," exclaimed Deerslayer, as he finally lowered
the glass, and prepared to enter the ark. "If the vagabonds do harbor
mischief in their minds, they are too cunning to let it be seen ; it 's true,
a raft may be in preparation in the woods, but it has not yet been brought
down to the lake. They can't guess that we are about to Quit the castle, and,
if they did, they 'ye no means of knowing where we intend to go."

"This is so true, Deerslayer," returned Judith, "that now all is ready, we
may proceed at once, boldly, and with. out the fear of being followed; else
we shall be behind our time."

"No, no; the matter needs management; for, though the savages are in the dark
as to Chingachgook and the rock, they they 'ye eyes and legs, and will see in
what direction we steer, and will be sartain to follow us. I shall strive to

baffle 'em, howsever, by heading the scow in all manner of ways, first in one
quarter and then in another, until they get to be a-leg-weary, and tired of
tramping a'ter us."

So far as it was in his power, Deerslayer was as good as his word. In less
than five minutes after this speech was made, the whole party was in the ark,
and in motion. There was a gentle breeze from the north, and boldly hoisting
the sail, the young man laid the bead of the unwieldy craft in such a
direction, as, after making a liberal but necessary allowance for leeway,
would have brought it ashore a couple of miles down the lake, and on its
eastern side. The sailing of the ark was never very swift, though, floating
as it did on the surface, it was not difficult to get it in motion, or to
urge it along over the water at the rate of some three or four miles in the
hour. The distance between the castle and the rock was a little more than two
leagues. Knowing the punctuality of an Indian, Deerslayer had made his
calcula­tions closely, and had given himself a little more time than was
necessary to reach the place of rendezvous, with a view to delay or to press
his arrival, as might prove most expedient.  . When he hoisted the sail, the
sun lay above the western hills, at an elevation that promised rather more
than two hours of day; and a few minutes satisfied him that the progress of
the scow was such as to equal his expectations.

It was a glorious June afternoon, and never did that soli­tary sheet of water
seem less like an arena of strife and bloodshed. The light air scarce
descended as low as the bed of the lake, hovering over it, as if unwilling to
disturb its deep tranquillity, or to ruffle its mirror-like surface- Even the
forests appeared to be slumbering in the sun, and a few piles of fleecy
clouds had lain for hours along the northern horizon like fixtures in the
atmosphere, placed there purely to embellish the scene. A few aquatic fowls
occasionally skimmed along the water, and a single raven was visible, sailing
high above the trees, and keeping a watchful eye on the forest beneath him,
in order to detect anything having life that the mysterious woods might offer
as prey.

The reader will probably have observed, that, amidst the frankness and
abruptness of manner which marked the fron­tier habits of Judith, her
language was superior to that used by her male companions, her own father
included. This difference extended as well to pronunciation as to the choice
of words and phrases. Perhaps nothing so soon betrays the education and
association as the modes of speech; and few accomplishments so much aid the
charm of female beauty as a graceful and even utterance, while nothing so
soon pro­duces the disenchantment that necessarily follows a discre­pancy
between appearance and manner, as a mean intonation of voice, or a vulgar use
of words. Judith and her sister were marked exceptions to all the girls of
their class, along that whole frontier; the officers of the nearest garrison
having often flattered the former with the belief that few ladies of the
towns acquitted themselves better than herself, in this important particular.
This was far from being literally true, but it was sufficiently near the fact
to give birth to the compliment. The girls were indebted to their mother for
this proficiency, having acquired from her, in childhood, an advantage that
no subsequent study or labor can give without a drawback, if neglected beyond
the earlier periods of life. Who that mother was, or rather had been, no one
but Hutter knew. She had now been dead two sum­mers, and, as was stated by
Hurry, she had been buried in the lake; whether in indulgence of a prejudice,
or from a reluctance to take the trouble to dig her grave, had fre­quently
been a matter of discussion between the rude beings of that region. Judith
had never visited the spot, but Hetty was present at the interment, and she
often paddled a canoe, about sunset. or by the light of the moon, to the
place, and gazed down into the limpid water, in the hope of being able to
catch a glimpse of the form that she had so tenderly loved from infancy to
the sad hour of their parting.

"Must we reach the rock exactly at the moment the sun sets?" Judith demanded
of the young man, as they stood near each other, Deerslayer holding the
steering-oar, and she working with a needle at some ornament of dress, that
much exceeded her station in life, and was altogether a novelty in the woods.
"Will a few minutes, sooner or later, alter the the matter? it will be very
hazardous to remain long as near the shore as that rock!"

"That's it, Judith; that 's the very difficulty! The rock 's within p'int
blank for a shot-gun, and 'twill never do to hover about it too close and too
long. When you have to deal with an Injin, you must calculate and manage, for
a red natur' dearly likes sarcumvention. Now you see, Judith, that I do not
steer towards the rock at all, but here to the eastward of it, whereby the
savages will be tramping off in that direction, and get their legs a-wearied,
and all for no advantage."

"You think, then, they see us, and watch our move­ments, Deerslayer? I was in
hopes they might have fallen back into the woods, and left us to ourselves
for a few hours."

"That's altogether a woman's consait. There 's no let-up in an Injin's
watchfulness when he 's on a war-path, and eyes are on us at this minute,
'though the lake presarves us. We must draw near the rock on a calculation,
and indivor to get the miscreants on a false scent. The Mingos have good
noses, they tell me; but a white man's reason ought always to equalize their
instinct."

Judith now entered into a desultory discourse with Deerslayer, in which the
girl betrayed her growing interest in the young man; an interest that his
simplicity of mind and her decision of character, sustained as it was by the
conscious­ness awakened by the consideration her personal charms so
universally produced, rendered her less anxious to conceal than might
otherwise have been the case. She was scarcely forward in her manner, though
there was sometimes a freedom in her glances that it required all the aid of
her exceeding beauty to prevent from awakening suspicions unfavorable to her
discretion, if not to her morals. With Deerslayer, however, these glances
were rendered less obnox­ious to so unpleasant a construction; for she seldom
looked at him without discovering much of the sincerity and nature that
accompany the purest emotions of woman. It was a little remarkable that, as
his captivity lengthened, neither of the girls manifested any great concern
for her father; but, as has been said already, their habits gave them
confidence, and they looked forward to his liberation, by means of a ransom,
with a confidence that might, in a great degree, account for their apparent
indifference. Once before, Hutter had been in the hands of the Iroquois, and
a few skins had readily effected his release. This event, however, unknown to
the sisters, had occurred in a time of peace between Eng­land and France, and
when the savages were restrained, in­stead of being encouraged to commit
their excesses, by the policy of the different colonial governments. While
Judith was loquacious and caressing in her man­ner, Hetty remained thoughtful
and silent. Once, indeed, she drew near to Deerslayer, and questioned him a
little closely as to his intentions, as well as concerning the mode of
effecting his purpose; but her wish to converse went no further. As soon as
her simple queries were answered -and answered they all were, in the fullest
and kindest manner-she withdrew to her scat, and continued to work on a
coarse garment that she was making for her father, sometimes humming a low
melancholy air, and frequently sighing.

In this manner the time passed away; and when the sun was beginning to glow
behind the fringe of the pines that bounded the western hill, or about twenty
minutes before it actually set, the ark was nearly as low as the point where
Hutter and Hurry had been made prisoners. By sheering first to one side of
the lake, and then to the other, Deer­slayer managed to create an uncertainty
as to his object; and, doubtless, the savages, who were unquestionably
watching his movements, were led to believe that his aim was to communicate
with them, at or near this spot, and would hasten in that direction, in order
to be in readiness t, profit by circumstances. This artifice was well
managed; since the sweep of the bay, the curvature of the lake, and the low
marshy land that intervened, would probably al­low the ark to reach the rock
before its pursuers, if really collected near this point, could have time to
make the circuit that would be required to get there by land. With a view to
aid this deception, Deerslayer stood as near the western shore as was at all
prudent; and then causing Judith and Hetty to enter the house, or cabin, and
crouching himself so as to conceal his person by the frame of the scow, he
suddenly threw the head of the latter round, and began to make the best of
his way towards the outlet. Favored by an increase in the wind, the progress
of the ark was such as to promise the complete success of this plan, though
the crab-like movement of the craft compelled the helmsman to keep its head
looking in a direction very different from that in which it was actually
moving.




Chapter IX.

"Yet art thou prodigal of smiles-
Smiles, sweeter than thy frowns are stern:
Earth sends from all her thousand isles,
A shout at thy return.
The glory that comes down from thee
Bathes, in deep joy, the land and sea."


Bryant, 'The Firmament," 11.19-24


It may assist the reader in understanding the events we are about to record,
if he has a rapidly sketched picture of the scene, placed before his eyes at
a single view. It will be remembered that the lake was an irregularly shaped
basin, of an outline that, in the main, was oval, but with bays and points to
relieve its formality and ornament its shores. The surface of this beautiful
sheet of water was now glittering like a gem, in the last rays of the evening
sun, and the setting of the whole, hills clothed in the richest forest
verdure, was lighted up with a sort of radiant smile, that is best described
in the beautiful lines we have placed at the head of this chapter. As the
banks, with few exceptions, rose abruptly from the water, even where the
mountain did not immediately bound the view, there was a nearly unbroken
fringe of leaves overhanging the placid lake, the trees starting out of the
acclivities, inclining to the light, until, in many instances they extended
their long limbs and straight trunks some forty or fifty feet beyond the line
of the perpendicular. In these cases we allude only to the giants of the
forest, pines of a hundred or a hundred and fifty feet in height, for of the
smaller growth, very many inclined so far as to steep their lower branches in
the water.
In the position in which the Ark had now got, the castle was concealed from
view by the projection of a point, as indeed was the northern extremity of
the lake itself. A respectable moun­tain, forest clad, and rounded, like all
the rest, limited the view in that direction, stretching immediately across
the whole f the fair scene, with the exception of a deep bay that passed the
western end, lengthening the basin, for more than a mile.

The manner in which the water flowed out of the lake, beneath the leafy
arches of the trees that lined the sides of the stream, has already been
mentioned, and it has also been said that the rock, which was a favorite
place of rendezvous throughout all that region, and where Deerslayer now
expected to meet his friend, stood near this outlet, and at no great distance
from the shore. It was a large, isolated stone that rested on the bottom of
the lake, apparently left there when the waters tore away the earth from
around it, in forcing for themselves a passage down the river, and which had
obtained its shape from the action of the elements, during the slow progress
of centuries. The height of this rock could scarcely equal six feet, and, as
has been said, its shape was not unlike that which is usually given to
bee­hives, or to a hay-cock. The latter, indeed, gives the best idea not only
of its form, but of its dimensions. It stood, and still stands, for we are
writing of real scenes, within fifty feet of the bank, and in water that was
only two feet in depth, though there were seasons in which its rounded apex,
if such a term can properly be used, was covered by the lake. Many of the
trees stretched so far forward, as almost to blend the rock with the shore,
when seen from a little distance, and one tall pine in particular overhung it
in a way to form a noble and ap­propriate canopy to a seat that had held many
a forest chief­tain, during the long succession of unknown ages, in which
America, and all it contained, had existed apart, in mysterious solitude, a
world by itself; equally without, a familiar history, and without an origin
that the annals of man can reach.

When distant some two or three hundred feet from the shore, Deerslayer took
in his sail. He dropped his grapnel, as soon as he found the Ark had drifted
in a line that was directly to windward of the rock. The motion of the scow
was then checked, when it was brought head to wind, by the action of the
breeze. As soon as this was done, Deerslayer "paid out line," and suffered
the vessel to "set down" upon the rock, as fast as the light air could force
it to leeward. Floating entirely on the surface, this was soon effected, and
the young man checked the drift when he was told that the stern of the scow
was within fifteen or eighteen feet of the desired spot.

In executing this maneuver, Deerslayer had proceeded promptly, for, while he
did not in the least doubt that he was both watched and followed by the foe,
he believed he distracted their movements, by the apparent uncertainty of his
own, and he knew they could have no means of ascertaining that the rock was
his aim, unless indeed one of their prisoners had betrayed him; a chance so
improbable in itself, as to give him no concern. Notwithstanding the celerity
and decision his movements, he did not, however, venture so near the shore
without taking due precautions to effect a retreat, in the event of its
becoming necessary. He held the line in his hand, and Judith was stationed at
a loop, on the side of the cabin next the shore, where she could watch the
beach and the rock, and give timely notice of the approach of either friend
or foe. Hetty was also placed on watch, but it was to keep the trees over
head in view, lest some enemy might ascend one, and, by completely commanding
the interior of the scow render the defence of the hut, or cabin, useless.

The sun had disappeared from the lake and valley, when Deerslayer checked the
Ark, in the manner mentioned. Still it wanted a few minutes to the true
sunset, and he knew Indian punctuality too well to anticipate any unmanly
haste in his friend. The great question was, whether, by enemies as he was
known to be, he had escaped their toils. The occurrences of the last twenty-
four hours must be a secret to him, and like himself, Chingachgook was yet
young on a path. It was true, he came prepared to encounter the party that
withheld his promised bride, but he had no means ascertaining the extent of
the danger he run, or the precise positions occupied by either friends, or
foes. In a word, the trained sagacity, and untiring caution of an Indian were
had to rely on, amid the critical risks he unavoidably ran.

"Is the rock empty, Judith?" enquired Deerslayer, as soon as he had checked
the drift of the Ark, deeming it imprudent to venture unnecessarily near the
shore. "Is any thing to be seen of the Delaware chief?"

"Nothing, Deerslayer. Neither rock, shore, trees, nor lake seems to have ever
held a human form."

'Keep close, Judith-keep close, Hetty-a rifle has a prying eye, a nimble
foot, and a desperate fatal tongue. Keep close then, but keep up actyve
looks, and be on the alart T would grieve me to the heart, did any harm befal
either of you.'

"And you Deerslayer-" exclaimed Judith, turning her handsome face from the
loop, to bestow a gracious and grate­ful look on the young man - "do you
'keep close', and have a proper care that the savages do not catch a glimpse
of you! A bullet might be as fatal to you as to one of us; and the blow that
you felt, would be felt by us all."

"No fear of me, Judith-no fear of me, my good gal. Do not look this-a-way,
although you look so pleasant and comely, but keep your eyes on the rock, and
the shore, and the-"

Deerslayer was interrupted by a slight exclamation from the girl, who, in
obedience to his hurried gestures, as much as in obedience to his words, had
immediately bent her looks again, in the opposite direction.

"What is't? -What is't, Judith?" he hastily demanded-"Is any thing to be
seen?"

"There is a man on the rock! - An Indian warrior, in his paint-and armed!"

"Where does he wear his hawk's feather?" eagerly added Deerslayer, relaxing
his hold of the line, in readiness to drift nearer to the place of
rendezvous. "Is it fast to the war-lock, or does he carry it above the left
ear?"

Tis as you say, above the left ear; he smiles, too, and mutters the word
'Mohican.'"

"God be praised, 'tis the Sarpent, at last!" exclaimed the young man,
suffering the line to slip through his hands, until hearing a light bound, in
the other end of the craft, he instantly checked the rope, and began to haul
it in, again, under the assurance that his object was effected.
At that moment the door of the cabin was opened hastily, and, a warrior,
darting through the little room, stood at Deerslayer's side, simply uttering
the exclamation "Hutty!" At the next instant, Judith and Hetty shrieked, and
the air was  filled with the yell of twenty savages, who came leaping
through the branches, down the bank, some actually falling headlong into the
water, in their haste.

"Pull, Deerslayer," cried Judith, hastily barring the door, in order to
prevent an inroad by the passage through which the Delaware had just entered;
"pull, for life and death-the lake is full of savages, wading after us!"

The young men - for Chingachgook immediately came to his friend's assistance-
needed no second bidding, but they applied themselves to their task in a way
that showed how urgent they deemed the occasion. The great difficulty was in
suddenly overcoming the   inertia of so large a mass, for, once in motion, it
was easy to cause the scow to skim the water, with all the necessary speed.

"Pull, Deerslayer, for Heaven's sake!" cried Judith, again at the loop-"These
wretches rush into the water like hounds following their prey! Ah - the scow
moves! and now, the water deepens, to the arm-pits of the foremost, but they
reach for­ward, and will seize the Ark!"

A slight scream, and then a joyous laugh followed from the girl; the first
produced by a desperate effort of their pursuers, and the last by its
failure; the scow, which had now got fairly in motion gliding ahead into deep
water, with a velocity that set the designs of their enemies at nought. As
the two men were prevented by the position of the cabin, from seeing what
passed astern, they were compelled to enquire of the girls, into the state of
the chase.

"What now, Judith? - What next? - Do the Mingos still follow, or are we quit
of'em, for the present," demanded Deer­slayer, when he felt the rope yielding
as if the scow was going fast ahead, and heard the scream and the laugh of
the girl, almost in the same breath.

"They have vanished! -One-the last-is just burying himself in the bushes of
the bank - There, he has disappeared in the shadows of the trees! You have
got your friend, and we are all safe!"

The two men now made another great effort, pulled the Ark up swiftly to the
grapnel, tripped it, and when the scow had shot some distance, and lost its
way, they let the anchor drop again. Then, for the first time since their
meeting, they ceased their efforts. As the floating house now lay several
hundred feet from the shore, and offered a complete protection against
bullets, there was no longer any danger, or any motive for im­mediate
exertion.

The manner in which the two friends now recognised each other, was highly
characteristic. Chingachgook, a noble, tall, handsome and athletic young
Indian warrior, first examined his rifle, with care, opening the pan to make
sure that the priming was not wet, and, assured of this important fact, he
next cast furtive but observant glances around him, at the strange
habitation, and at the two girls. Still he spoke not, and most of all, did he
avoid the betrayal of a womanish curiosity, by asking questions.

"Judith and Hetty" said Deerslayer, with an untaught, natural courtesy-"this
is the Mohican chief of whom you've heard me speak; Chingachgook as he is
called; which signifies Big Sarpent; so named for his wisdom and prudence,
and cun­ning, and my 'arliest and latest fri'nd. I know'd it must be he, by
the hawk's feather, over the left ear, most other warriors wearing 'em on the
war-lock."

As Deerslayer ceased speaking, he laughed heartily, excited more perhaps by
the delight of having got his friend safe at his side, under circumstances so
trying, than by any conceit that happened to cross his fancy, and exhibiting
this outbreaking of feeling in a manner that was a little remarkable, since
his mer­riment was not accompanied by any noise. Although Chin­gachgook both
understood and spoke English, he was unwill­ing to communicate his thoughts
in it, like most Indians, and when he had met Judith's cordial shake of the
hand, and Hetty's milder salute, in the courteous manner that became a chief,
he turned away, apparently to await the moment when it might suit his friend
to enter into an explanation of his future intentions, and to give a
narrative of what had passed since their separation. The other understood his
meaning, and discovered his own mode of reasoning. in the matter, by
ad­dressing the girls.
"This wind will soon die away altogether, now the sun is down," he said, "and
there is no need for rowing ag'in it. In half an hour, or so, it will either
be a flat calm, or the air will come off from the south shore, when we will
begin our journey back ag'in to the castle; in the mean while, the Delaware
and I will talk over matters, and get correct idees of each other's notions
consarning the course we ought to take."

No one opposed this proposition, and the girls withdrew into the cabin to
prepare the evening meal, while the two young men took their seats on the
head of the scow and began to con­verse. The dialogue was in the language of
the Delawares. As that dialect, however, is but little understood, even by
the  learned, we shall, not only on this, but on all subsequent occasions
render such parts, as it may be necessary to give closely, into liberal
English; preserving, as far as possible, the idion' and peculiarities of the
respective speakers, by way of presenting the pictures in the most graphic
forms to the minds of the readers.

It is unnecessary to enter into the details first related by Deerslayer, who
gave a brief narrative of the facts that an already familiar to those who
have read our pages. In relating these events, however, it may be well to say
that the speaker touched only on the outlines, more particularly abstaining
from saying .any thing about his encounter with, and victory over the
Iroquois, as well as to his own exertions in behalf of the two deserted young
women. When Deerslayer ended, the Delaware took up the narrative, in turn,
speaking sententiously and with grave dignity. His account was both clear and
short, nor was it embellished by any incidents that did not directly concern
the history of his departure from the villages of his people, and his arrival
in the valley of the Susquehannah. On reaching the latter, which was at a
point only half a mile south of the outlet, he had soon struck a trail, which
gave him notice of the probable vicinity of enemies. Being prepared for such
an occurrence, the object of the expedition calling him directly into the
neighborhood of the party of Iroquois that was known to be out, he considered
the discovery as fortunate, rather than the reverse, and took the usual
precautions to turn it to account. First following the river to its source,
and ascertaining the position of the rock, he met another trail, and had
actually been hovering for hours on the flanks of his enemies, watching
equally for an opportunity to meet his mistress, and to take a scalp; and it
may be questioned which he most ardently desired. He kept near the lake, and
occasionally he ventured to some spot, where he could get a view of what was
passing on its suffice. The Ark had been seen and watched, from the mo­ment
it hove in sight, though the young chief was necessarily ignorant that it was
to be the instrument of his effecting the desired junction with his friend.
The uncertainty of its movements, and the fact that it was unquestionably
managed by white men, soon led him to conjecture the truth, however, and he
held himself in readiness to get on board whenever a
suitable occasion might offer. As the sun drew near the horizon he repaired
to the rock, where, on emerging from the forest, he was gratified in finding
the Ark lying, apparently in readiness to receive him. The manner of his
appearance, and of his entrance into the craft is known.

Although Chingachgook had been closely watching his enemies for hours, their
sudden and close pursuit, as he reached the scow, was as much a matter of
surprise to himself, as it had been to his friend. He could only account for
it, by the fact of their being more numerous than he had at first supposed,
and by their having out parties of the existence of which he was ig­norant.
Their regular, and permanent encampment, if the word permanent can be applied
to the residence of a party that intended to remain out, in all probability,
but a few weeks, was not far from the spot where Hutter and Hurry had fallen
into their hands, and, as a matter of course, near a spring.

"Well, Sarpent," asked Deerslayer, when the other had ended his brief but
spirited narrative, speaking always in the Delaware tongue, which for the
reader's convenience only we render into the peculiar vernacular of the
speaker-"Well, Sar­pent, as you've been scouting around these Mingos, have
you any thing to tell us of their captyves, the father of these young women,
and of another, who, I somewhat conclude, is the lovyer of one of 'em."

"Ghingachgook has seen them. An old man, and a young warrior- the falling
hemlock and the tall pine."

"You're not so much out, Delaware; you're not so much out. Old Hutter is
decaying, of a sartainty, though many solid blocks might be hewn out of his
trunk yet, and, as for Hurry Harry, so far as heighth, and strength and
comliness go, he may be called the pride of the human forest. Were the men
bound, or, in any manner, suffering torture? I ask on account of the young
women, who, I dare to say, would be glad to know."

"It is not so, Deerslayer. The Mingos are too many to cage their game. Some
watch; some sleep; some scout; some hunt. The pale faces are treated like
brothers to-day; to-morrow they will lose their scalps."

"Yes, that's red natur', and must be submitted to! Judith and Hetty, here's
comforting tidings for you, the Delaware telling me that neither your father
nor Hurry Harry is in suffering, but, bating the loss of liberty, as well
off, as we are ourselves. Of course they are kept in the camp; otherwise they
do much as they please."

"I rejoice to hear this, Deerslayer," returned Judith, "and now we are joined
by your friend, I make no manner of ques­tion that we shall find an
opportunity to ransom the prisoners. If there are any women in the camp, I
have articles of dress that will catch their eyes, and, should the worst come
to the worst, we can open the great chest, which, I think will be found to
hold things that may tempt the chiefs."

"Judith," said the young man, looking up at her, with a smile, and an
expression of earnest curiosity, that, spite of the growing obscurity did not
escape the watchful looks of the girl, "can you find it in your heart, to
part with your own finery, to release prisoners; even though one be your own
father, and the other is your sworn suitor and lovyer?"

The flush on the face of the girl arose in part from resent­ment, but more
perhaps from a gentler and a novel feeling, that, with the capricious
waywardness of taste, had been rapidly rendering her more sensitive to the
good opinion of the youth who questioned her, than to that of any other
person. Suppressing the angry sensation, with instinctive quickness, she
answered with a readiness and truth, that caused her sister to draw near to
listen, though the obtuse intellect of the latter was far from comprehending
the workings of a heart as treacherous, as uncertain, and as impetuous in its
feelings, as that of the spoiled and flattered beauty.
"Deerslayer," answered Judith, after a moment's pause, "I shall be honest
with you. I confess, that the time 'has been when what you call finery, was
to me the dearest thing on earth; but I begin to feel differently. Though
Hurry Harry is nought to me nor ever can be, I would give all I own to set
him free. If I would do this, for blustering, bullying, talking Hurry, who
has nothing but good looks to recommend him, you may judge what I would do
for my own father."

"This sounds well, and is according to woman's gifts. Ah's, me! The same
feelin's is to be found among the young women of the Delawares. I've known
'em, often and often, sacrifice their vanity to their hearts. Tis as it
should be-'tis as it should be I suppose, in both colours. Woman was created
for the feelin's, and is pretty much ruled by feelin'."

"Would the savages let father go, if Judith and I give them all our best
things?" demanded Hetty, in her innocent, mild, manner.

"Their women might interfere, good Hetty; yes, their women might interfere
with such an ind in view. But, tell me, Sarpent, how is it as to squaws among
the knaves; have they many of their own women in the camp?"

The Delaware heard, and understood all that passed, though with Indian
gravity and finesse he had sat, with averted face, seemingly inattentive to a
discourse in which he had no direct concern. Thus appealed to, however, he
answered his friend in his ordinary sententious manner.

"Six-" he said, holding up all the fingers of one hand, and the thumb of the
other, "beside this." The last number denoted his betrothed, whom, with the
poetry and truth of nature, he described by laying his hand on his own heart.

"Did you see her, chief- did you get a glimpse of her pleas­ant countenance,
or come close enough to her ear, to sing in it the song she loves to hear?"

"No, Deerslayer- the trees were too many, and leaves covered their boughs
like clouds hiding' the heavens, in a storm. But"- and the young warrior
turned his dark face towards his friend, with a smile on it that illuminated
its fierce-looking paint, and naturally stern lineaments, with a bright gleam
of human feeling, "Ghingachgook heard the laugh of Wah-ta--Wah, and knew it
from the laugh of the women of the Iroquois. It sounded in his ears, like the
chirp of the wren."

"Ay, trust a lovyer's ear for that, and a Delaware's ear for all sounds that
are ever heard in the woods. I know not why it is so, Judith, but when young
men- and I dares to say it may be all the same with young women, too - but
when they get to have kind feelin's towards each other, it's wonderful how
pleas­ant the laugh, or the speech becomes, to the other person. I've seen
grim warriors listening to the chattering and the laughing of young gals, as
if it was church music, such as is heard in the old Dutch church that stands
in the great street of Albany, where I've been, more than once, with peltry
and game."

"And you, Deerslayer," said Judith quickly, and with more
sensibility than marked her usually light and thoughtless manner, -"have you
never felt how pleasant it is to listen to the laugh of the girl you love?"

"Lord bless you gal! -Why I've never lived enough among my own colour to drop
into them sort of feelin's, - no never! I dares to say, they are nat'ral and
right, but to me there's no music so sweet as the sighing of the wind in the
tree tops, and the rippling of a stream from a full; sparkling, natyve
fountain of pure forest water-unless, indeed," he continued, dropping his
head for an instant in a thoughtful manner-"unless indeed it be the open
mouth of a sartain hound, when I'm on the track of a fat buck-As for
unsartain dogs, I care little for their cries, seem' they are as likely to
speak when the deer is not in sight, as when it is."

Judith walked slowly and pensively away, nor was there any of her ordinary
calculating coquetry, in the light tremulous sigh, that, unconsciously to
herself, arose to her lips. On the other hand Hetty listened with guileless
attention, though it struck her simple mind as singular that the young man
should prefer the melody of the woods, to the songs of girls, or even to the
laugh of innocence and joy. Accustomed, however, to defer, in most things, to
her sister, she soon followed Judith into the cabin, where she took a seat,
and remained pondering intensely over some occurrence, or resolution, or
opinion-which was a secret to all but herself. Left alone, Deerslayer and his
friend resumed their discourse.

"Has the young pale-face hunter been long on this lake?" demanded the
Delaware, after courteously waiting for the other to speak first.

"Only since yesterday noon, Sarpent, though that has been long enough to see
and do much." The gaze that the Indian fastened on his companion was so keen
that it seemed to mock the gathering darkness of the night. As the other
furtively returned his look, he saw the two black eyes glistening on him,
like the balls of the panther, or those of the penned wolf. He understood the
meaning of this glowing gaze, and answered evasively, as he fancied would
best become the modesty of a white man's gifts.

"Tis as you suspect, Sarpent; yes, 'tis somewhat that-a-way.
I have fell in with the inimy, and I suppose it may be said I've fou't them,
too."

An exclamation of delight and exultation escaped the In­dian, and then laying
his hand eagerly on the arm of his friend, he asked if there were any scalps
taken.

"That I will maintain in the face of all the Delaware tribe, old Tamenund,
and your own father, the great Uncas, as well as the rest, is ag'in white
gifts! My scalp is on my head, as you can see, Sarpent, and that was the only
scalp that was in danger, when one side was altogether Christian and white."

"Did no warrior fall? - Deerslayer did not get his name, by being slow of
sight, or clumsy with the rifle!"

"In that particular, chief, you're nearer reason, and therefore nearer being
right. I may say one Mingo fell."

"A chief'." demanded the other with startling vehemence.

"Nay, that's more than I know, or can say. He was artful, and treacherous,
and stout-hearted, and may well have gained popularity enough with his people
to be named to that rank. The man fou't well, though his eye was'n't quick
enough for one who had had his schooling in your company, Delaware."
"My brother and friend struck the body?"

"That was uncalled for, seeing that the Mingo died in my arms. The truth may
as well be said, at once; he fou't like a man of red gifts, and I fou't like
a man with gifts of my own colour. God gave me the victory; I coul'n't fly in
the face of his Providence by forgetting my birth and natur'. White he made
me, and white I shall live and die."

"Good! Deerslayer is a pale face, and has pale-face hands. A Delaware will
look for the scalp, and hang it on a pole, and sing a song in his honour,
when we go back to our people. The glory belongs to the tribe; it must not be
lost."
"This is easy talking, but 'twill not be as easy doing. The Mingo's body is
in the hands of his fri'nds, and, no doubt, is hid in some hole, where
Delaware cunning will never be able to get at the scalp."

The young man then gave his friend a succinct, but clear ac­count, of the
event of the morning, concealing nothing of any moment, and yet touching on
every thing modestly and with a careful attention to avoid the Indian habit
of boasting.Chingachgo ok again expressed his satisfaction at the honour won
by his friend, and then both arose, the hour having arrived when it became
prudent to move the Ark further from the land.

It was now quite dark, the heavens having become clouded, and the stars hid.
The north wind had ceased, - as was usual with the setting of the sun, and a
light air arose from the south. This change favoring the design of
Deerslayer, he lifted his grapnel, and the scow immediately and quite
perceptibly began to drift more into the lake. The sail was set, when the
motion of the craft increased to a rate not much less than two miles in the
hour. As this superseded the necessity of rowing, an occupation that an
Indian would not be likely to desire, Deerslayer, Chingachgook and Judith
seated themselves in the stern of the scow, where they first governed its
movements by holding the oar. Here they discoursed on their future movements,
and on the means that ought to be used in order to effect the liberation of
their friends.

In this dialogue Judith held a material part, the Delaware readily
understanding all she said, while his own replies and remarks, both of which
were few and pithy, were occasionally rendered into English by his friend.
Judith rose greatly in the estimation of her companions, in the half hour
that followed. Prompt of resolution and firm of purpose, her suggestions and
expedients partook of her spirit and sagacity, both of which were of a
character to find favor with men of the frontier. The events that had
occurred since their meeting, as well as her isolated and dependant
situation, induced the girl to feel towards Deerslayer like the friend of a
year instead of an acquaintance of a day, and so completely had she been won
by his guileless truth of character and of feeling, pure novelties in our
sex, as respected her own experience, that his peculiarities excited her
curiosity, and created a confidence that had never been awakened by any other
man. Hitherto she had been com­pelled to stand on the defensive, in her
intercourse with men, with what success was best known to herself, but here
had she been suddenly thrown into the society, and under the protec­tion of a
youth, who evidently as little contemplated evil towards herself, as if he
had been her brother. The freshness of his integrity, the poetry and truth of
his feelings, and even the quaintness of his forms of speech, all had their
influence, and aided in awakening an interest that she found as pure as it
was sudden and deep. Hurry's fine face and manly form had never compensated
for his boisterous and vulgar tone, and her inter­course with the officers
had prepared her to make comparisons under which even his great natural
advantages suffered. But this very intercourse with the officers who
occasionally came upon the lake to fish and hunt, had an effect in producing
her present sentiments towards the young stranger. With them, while her
vanity had been gratified, and her self-love strongly awakened, she had many
causes deeply to regret the acquain­tance-if not to mourn over it, in secret
sorrow-for it was im­possible for one of her quick intellect not to perceive
how hollow was the association between superior and inferior, and that she
was regarded as the play thing of an idle hour, rather than as an equal and a
friend, by even the best intentioned and least designing of her scarlet-clad
admirers. Deerslayer, on the other hand, had a window in his breast, through
which the light of his honesty was ever shining; and even his indifference to
charms that so rarely failed to produce a sensation, piqued the pride of the
girl, and gave him an interest that another, seemingly more favored by
nature, might have failed to excite.

In this manner half an hour passed, during which time the Ark had been slowly
stealing over the water, the darkness thickening around it; though it was
easy to see that the gloom of the forest at the southern end of the lake, was
getting to be distant, while the mountains that lined the sides of the
beautiful basin were overshadowing it, nearly from side to side. There was,
indeed, a narrow stripe of water, in the centre of the lake where the dim
light that was still shed from the heavens, fell upon its surface in a line
extending north and south; and along this faint track, a sort of inverted
milky way, in which the obscurity was not quite as dense as in other places,
the scow held her course, he who steered well knowing that it led in the
direction he wished to go. The reader is not to suppose, however, that any
difficulty could exist as to the course. This would have been determined by
that of the air