stoicism of the Indians,
well knowing that there was no more certain mode of securing their respect
than by imitating their self-command. Nor did the savages themselves betray
the least sign of surprise at this sudden appearance of a stranger among
them. In a word, this arrival produced much less visible sensa­tion, though
occurring under circumstances so peculiar, than would be seen in a village of
higher pretensions to civilization, did an ordinary traveller drive up to the
door of its principal inn. Still a few warriors collected, and it was evident
by the manner in which they glanced at Hetty as they conversed together, that
she was the subject of their discourse, and pro­bable that the reasons of her
unlooked-for appearance were matters of discussion. This phlegm of manner is
characteristic of the North American Indian - some say of his white successor
also - but, in this case much should be attributed to the peculiar situation
in which the party was placed. The force in the Ark, the presence of
Ghingachgook excepted, was well known, no tribe or body of troops was
believed to be near, and vigilant eyes were posted round the entire lake,
watching, day and night, the slightest movement of those whom it would not be
exaggerated now to term the besieged.

Hutter was inwardly much moved by the conduct of Hetty, though he affected so
much indifference of manner. He recollected her gentle appeal to him, before
he left the Ark, and misfortune rendered that of weight, which might have
been forgotten amid the triumph of success. Then he knew thesimple, single-
hearted fidelity of his child, and understood why she had come, and the total
disregard of self that reigned in all her acts.

"This is not well, Hetty," he said, deprecating the conse­quences to the girl
herself, more than any other evil. "These are fierce Iroquois, and are as
little apt to forget an injury, as a favor."

"Tell me, father-" returned the girl, looking furtively about her, as if
fearful of being overheard, "did God let you do the cruel errand on which you
came? I want much to know this, that I may speak to the Indians plainly, if
he did not."

"You should not have come hither, Hetty; these brutes will not understand
your nature, or your intentions!"

"How was it, father; neither you, nor Hurry, seems to have any thing that
looks like scalps."

"If that will set your mind at peace, child, I can answer you, no. I had
caught the young creatur' who came here with you, but her screeches soon
brought down upon me a troop of the wild cats, that was too much for any
single christian to with­stand. If that will do you any good, we are as
innocent of hav­ing taken a scalp, this time, as I make no doubt we shall
also be innocent of receiving the bounty."

"Thank god for that, father! Now I can speak boldly to the Iroquois, and with
an easy conscience. I hope Hurry, too, has not been able to harm any of the
Indians?"

"Why, as to that matter, Hetty," returned the individual in question, "you've
put it pretty much in the natyve character of the religious truth. Hurry has
not been able, and that is the long and short of it. I've seen many squalls,
old fellow, both on land and on the water, but never did I feel one as lively
and as snappish as that which come down upon us, night afore last, in the
shape of an Indian hurrah-boys! Why, Hetty, you're no great matter at a
reason, or an idee that lies a little deeper than common, but you're human,
and have some human notions -now, I'll just ask you to look at them
circumstances. Here was old Tom, your father, and myself, bent on a legal
operation, as is to be seen in the words of the law and the proclomation;
thinking no harm; when we were set upon by critturs that were more like a
pack of hungry wolves, than mortal savages even,and there they had us
tethered like two sheep, in less time than it has taken me to tell you the
story."

"You are free, now, Hurry," returned Hetty, glancing timidly at the fine
unfettered limbs of the young giant-"You have no cords, or withes, to pain
your arms, or legs, now.

"Not I, Hetty. Natur' is natur', and freedom is natur', too. My limbs have a
free look, but that's pretty much the amount of it, sin' I can't use them in
the way I should like. Even these trees have eyes; ay, and tongues too; for
was the old man, here, or I, to start one single rod beyond our gaol limits,
sar­vice would be put on the bail afore we could 'gird up our loins' for a
race, and, like as not, four or five rifle bullets would be travelling arter
us, carrying so many invitations to curb our impatience. There is'n't a gaol
in the colony as tight as this, we are now in; for I've tried the vartues of
two or three on 'em, and I know the mater'als they are made of, as well as
the men that made 'em; takin' down being the next step in schoolin', to
puttin' up, in all such fabrications."

Lest the reader should get an exaggerated opinion of Hurry's demerits, from
this boastful and indiscreet revelation, it may be well to say that his
offences were confined to assaults and batteries, for several of which he had
been imprisoned, when, as he has just said, he often escaped by demonstrating
the flimsiness of the constructions in which he was confined, by opening for
himself doors, in spots where the architects had neglected to place them. But
Hetty had no knowledge of gaols, and little of the nature of crimes, beyond
what her unadul­terated and almost instinctive perceptions of right and wrong
taught her, and this sally of the rude being who had spoken, was lost upon
her. She understood his general meaning, how­ever, and answered in reference
to that alone.

"It's so best, Hurry," she said. "It is best father and you should be quiet
and peaceable, 'till I have spoken to the Iro­quois, when all will be well
and happy. I do'n't wish either of you to follow, but leave me to myself. As
soon as all is settled, and you are at liberty to go back to the castle, I
will come and let you know it."

Hetty spoke with so much simple earnestness, seemed so confident of success,
and wore so high an air of moral feelingand truth, that both the listeners
felt more disposed to attach an importance to her mediation, than might
otherwise have happened. When she manifested an intention to quit them,
therefore, they offered no obstacle, though they saw she was about to join
the group of chiefs who were consulting apart, seemingly on the manner and
motive of her own sudden ap­pearance.

When Hist-for so we love best, to call her-quitted her companion, she strayed
near one or two of the elder warriors, who had shown her most kindness in her
captivity, the prin­cipal man of whom, had even offered to adopt her as his
child, if she would consent to become a Huron. In taking this direc­tion, the
shrewd girl did so to invite inquiry. She was too well trained in the habits
of her people, to obtrude the opinions of one of her sex and years on men and
warriors, but nature had furnished a tact and ingenuity that enabled her to
attract the attention she desired, without wounding the pride of those to
whom it was her duty to defer, and respect. Even her affected indifference
stimulated curiosity, and Hetty had hardly reached the side of her father,
before the Delaware girl was brought within the circle of the warriors, by a
secret but significant gesture. Here she was questioned as to the person of
her com­panion, and the motives that had brought her to the camp. This was
all that Hist desired. She explained the manner in which she had detected the
weakness of Hetty's reason, rather exaggerating than lessening the deficiency
in her intellect, and then she related, in general terms, the object of the
girl in ven­turing among her enemies. The effect was all that the speaker
expected, her account investing the person and character of their visiter
with a sacredness and respect, that she well knew would prove her protection.
As soon as her own purpose was attained, Hist withdrew to a distance, where,
with female con­sideration, and a sisterly tenderness she set about the
prepara­tion of a meal, to be offered to her new friend, as soon as the
latter might be at liberty to partake of it. While thus occupied, however,
the ready girl in no degree relaxed in her watch­fulness, noting every change
of countenance among the chiefs, every movement of Hetty's, and the smallest
occurrence that could be likely to affect her own interests, or that of her
new friend.

As Hetty approached the chiefs, they opened their little cir­cle, with an
ease and deference of manner, that would have done credit to men of more
courtly origin. A fallen tree lay near, and the oldest of the warriors made a
quiet sign for the girl to be seated on it, taking his place at her side,
with the gentleness of a father. The others arranged themselves around the
two, with grave dignity, and then the girl, who had suffi­cient observation
to perceive that such a course was expected of her, began to reveal the
object of her visit. The moment she opened her mouth to speak, however, the
old chief gave a gen­tle sign for her to forbear, said a few words to one of
his juniors, and then waited in silent patience until the latter had summoned
Hist to the party. This interruption proceeded from the chief's having
discovered that there existed a necessity for an interpreter, few of the
Hurons present understanding the English language, and they but imperfectly.

Wah-ta!-Wah was not sorry to be called upon to be present at the interview,
and least of all in the character in which she was now wanted. She was aware
of the hazards she run in at­tempting to deceive one or two of the party, but
was none the less resolved to use every means that offered, and to practice
every artifice that an Indian education could supply, to con­ceal the facts
of the vicinity of her betrothed, and of the errand on which he had come. One
unpractised in the expedients and opinions of savage life, would not have
suspected the readiness of invention, the wariness of action, the high
resolution, the noble impulses, the deep self-devotion, and the feminine
disregard of self when the affections were concerned, that lay concealed
beneath the demure looks, the mild eyes, and the sunny smiles of this young
Indian beauty. As she approached them, the grim old warriors regarded her
with pleasure, for they had a secret pride in the hope of engrafting so rare
a scion on the stock of their own nation; adoption being as regularly
practised, and as distinctly recognized among the tribes of America, as it
ever had been among those nations that submit to the sway of the Civil Law.

As soon as Hist was seated by the side of Hetty, the old chief desired her to
ask "the fair young pale-face" what had brought her among the Iroquois, and
what they could do to serve her.

"Tell them, Hist, who I am-Thomas Hutter's youngest daughter; Thomas Hutter,
the oldest of their two prisoners; he who owns the castle and the Ark, and
who has the best right to be thought the owner of these hills, and that lake,
since he has dwelt so long, and trapped so long, and fished so long, among
them - They'll know whom you mean by Thomas Hutter, if you tell them, that.
And then tell them that I've come here to con­vince them they ought not to
harm father, and Hurry, but let them go, in peace, and to treat them as
brethren, rather than as enemies. Now tell them all this plainly, Hist, and
fear nothing for yourself, or me. God will protect us.

Wah-ta!-Wah did as the other desired, taking care to render the words of her
friend as literally as possible into the Iroquois tongue, a language she used
with a readiness almost equal to that with which she spoke her own. The
chiefs heard this open­ing explanation, with grave decorum, the two who had a
little knowledge of English, intimating their satisfaction with the
in­terpreter, by furtive but significant glances of the eyes.

"And, now, Hist," continued Hetty, as soon as it was in­timated to her that
she might proceed, "and, now, Hist, I wish you to tell these red men, word
for word, what I am about to say. Tell them first, that father and Hurry came
here with an intention to take as many scalps as they could, for the wicked
governor and the province have offered money for scalps, whether of warriors,
or women, men or children, and the love of gold was too strong for their
hearts to withstand it. Tell them this, dear Hist, just as you have heard it
from me, word for word."

Wah-ta!-Wah hesitated about rendering this speech as literally as had been
desired, but detecting the intelligence of those who understood English, and
apprehending even a greater knowledge than they actually possessed she found
herself compelled to comply. Contrary to what a civilized man would have
expected, the admission of the motives and of the errands of their prisoners,
produced no visible effect, on either the countenances or the feelings of the
listeners. They pro­bably considered the act meritorious, and that which
neither of them would have hesitated to perform in his own person, he would
not be apt to censure in another.

"And, now, Hist," resumed Hetty, as soon as she perceived that her first
speeches were understood by the chiefs, "you can tell them more. They know
that father and Hurry did not suc­ceed, and therefore they can bear them no
grudge for any harm that has been done. If they had slain their children and
wives, ii would not alter the matter, and I'm not certain that what I am
about to tell them would not have more weight had there been mischief done.
But ask them first, Hist, if they know there is a God, who reigns over the
whole earth, and is ruler and chief of all who live, let them be red, or
white, or what color they may?"
Wah-ta!-Wah looked a little surprised at this question, for the idea of the
Great Spirit is seldom long absent from the mind of an Indian girl. She put
the question, as literally as possible, however, and received a grave answer
in the affir­mative.

"This is right," continued Hetty, "and my duty will now be light. This Great
Spirit, as you call our God, has caused a book to be written, that we call a
bible, and in this book have been set down all his commandments, and his holy
will and pleasure, and the rules by which all men are to live, and
direc­tions how to govern the thoughts even, and the wishes, and the will.
Here, this is one of these holy books, and you must tell the chiefs what I am
about to read to them, from its sacred pages."

As Hetty concluded, she reverently unrolled a small English bible from its
envelope of coarse calico, treating the volume with the sort of external
respect that a Roman ist would be apt to show to a religious relic. As she
slowly proceeded in her task the grim warriors watched each movement with
riveted eyes, and when they saw the little volume appear a slight expression
of surprise escaped one or two of them. But Hetty held it out towards them,
in triumph as if she expected the sight would produce a visible miracle, and
then, without betraying either surprise or mortification at the Stoicism of
the Indian, she turned eagerly to her new friend, in order to renew the
discourse.

"This is the sacred volume, Hist," she said-"and these words, and lines, and
verses, and chapters, all came from God."

"Why Great Spirit no send book to Injin, too?" demanded Hist, with the
directness of a mind that -was totally un­sophisticated.
"Why?' answered Hetty, a little bewildered by a question so unexpected.
"Why?-Ah! you know the Indians do'n't know how to read."

If Hist was not satisfied with this explanation, she did not deem the point
of sufficient importance to be pressed. Simply bending her body, in a gentle
admission of the truth of what she heard, she sat patiently awaiting the
further arguments of the pale-face enthusiast.

"You can tell these chiefs that throughout this book, men are ordered to
forgive their enemies; to treat them as they would brethren; and never to
injure their fellow creatures, more especially on account of revenge, or any
evil passions. Do you think you can tell them this, so that they will
understand ii, Hist?'

"Tell him well enough, but he no very easy to understand." Hist then conveyed
the ideas of Hetty, in the best manner she could, to the attentive Indians,
who heard her words, with some such surprise as an American of our own times
would be apt to betray at a suggestion that the great modern, but vacillating
ruler of things human, public opinion, might be wrong. One or two of their
number, however, having met with missionaries, said a few words in
explanation, and then the group gave all its attention to the communications
that were to follow. Before Hetty resumed she enquired earnestly of Hist if
the chiefs had understood her, and receiving an evasive answer, was fain to
be satisfied.

"I will now read to the warriors some of the verses that it is good for them
to know,' continued the girl, whose manner grew more solemn and earnest as
she proceeded - "and they will remember that they are the very words of the
Great Spirit. First, then, ye are commanded to 'love thy neighbor as thyself'
Tell them that, dear Hist.'

"Neighbor, for Injin, no mean pale face,' answered the Delaware girl, with
more decision than she had hitherto thought it necessary to use. "Neighbor
mean Iroquois for Iro­quois, Mohican for Mohican, Pale face for pale face. No
need tell chief any thing else.'

"You forget, Hist, these are the words of the Great Spirit, and the chiefs
must obey them as well as others. Here is another commandment-'Whasoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other aLso.~"

"What that mean?' demanded Hist, with the quickness of lightning.

Hetty explained that it was an order not to resent injuries, but rather to
submit to receive fresh wrongs from the offender.

"And hear this, too, Hist," she added. " 'Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you.''

By this time Hetty had become excited; her eye gleamed with the earnestness
of her feelings, her cheeks flushed, and her voice, usually so low and
modulated, became stronger and more impressive. With the bible she had been
early made familiar by her mother, and she now turned from passage to
passage, with surprising rapidity, taking care to cull such verses as taught
the sublime lessons of christian charity and christian forgiveness. To
translate half she said, in her pious earnestness, Wah-ta!-Wah would have
found impracticable, had she made the effort, but wonder held her tongue
tied, equally with the chiefs, and the young, simple-minded en­thusiast had
fairly become exhausted with her own efforts, before the other opened her
mouth, again, to utter a syllable. Then, indeed, the Delaware girl gave a
brief translation of the substance of what had been both read and said,
confining herself to one or two of the more striking of the verses, those
that had struck her own imagination as the most paradoxical, and which
certainly would have been the most applicable to the case, could the
uninstructed minds of the listeners embrace the great moral truths they
conveyed.

It will be scarcely necessary to tell the reader the effect that such novel
duties would be likely to produce among a group of Indian warriors, with whom
it was a species of religious princi­ple never to forget a benefit, or to
forgive an injury. Fortunately, the previous explanations of Hist had
prepared the minds of the Hurons for something extravagant, and most of that
which to them seemed inconsistent and paradoxical, was accounted for by the
fact that the speaker possessed a mind that was con­stituted differently from
those of most of the human race. Still there were one or two old men who had
heard similar doctrines from the missionaries, and these felt a desire to
occupy an idle moment by pursuing a subject that they found so curious.

"This is the Good Book of the pale faces," observed one of these chiefs,
taking the volume from the unresisting hands of Hetty, who gazed anxiously at
his face, while he turned the leaves, as if she expected to witness some
visible results from the circumstance. "This is the law by which my white
brethren professes to live?"

Hist, to whom this question was addressed, if it might be considered as
addressed to any one, in particular, answered simply in the affirmative;
adding that both the French of the Canadas, and the Yengeese of the British
provinces equally admitted its authority, and affected to revere its
principles.

"Tell my young sister," said the Huron, looking directly at Hist, "that I
will open my mouth and say a few words."

"The Iroquois chief go to speak-My pale face friend listen,' said Hist.

"I rejoice to hear it!" exclaimed Hetty. "God has touched his heart, and he
will now let father and Hurry go."

"This is the pale face law," resumed the chief. 'It tells him to do good to
them, that hurt him, and when his brother asks him for his rifle to give him
the powder horn, too. Such is the pale face law?"

"Not so-not so-" answered Hetty earnestly, when these words had been
interpreted - "There is not a word about rifles in the whole book, and powder
and bullets give offence to the Great Spirit."

"Why then does the pale face use them? If he is ordered to give double to him
that asks only for one thing, why does he take double from the poor Indian
who ask for no thing. He comes from beyond the rising sun, with this book in
his hand, and he teaches the red man to read it, but why does he forget
himself all it says? When the Indian gives, he is never satisfied; and now he
offers gold for the scalps of our women and children, though he calls us
beasts if we take the scalp of a warrior killed in open war. My name is
Rivenoak."

When Hetty had got this formidable question fairly presented to her mind in
the translation, and Hist did her duty with more than usual readiness on this
occasion, it scarcely need be said that she was sorely perplexed. Abler heads
than that of this poor girl have frequently been puzzled by questions of a
similar drift, and it is not surprising that with all her own earnestness and
sincerity she did not know what answer to make.

"What shall I tell them, Hist," she asked imploringly - "I know that all I
have read from the book is true, and yet it would'n't seem so, would it, by
the conduct of those to whom the book was given?"

"Give 'em pale-face reason," returned Hist, ironically- "that always good for
one side; though he bad for t'other."

"No-no-Hist there can't be two sides to truth-and yet it does seem strange!
I'm certain I have read the verses right, and no one would be so wicked as to
print the word of God wrong. That can never be, Hist."

"Well, to poor Injin girl, it seem every thing can be to pale faces,"
returned the other, coolly. "One time 'ey say white, and one time 'ey say
black. Why never can be?"

Hetty was more and more embarrassed, until overcome with the apprehension
that she had failed in her object, and that the lives of her father and Hurry
would be the forfeit of some blunder of her own, she burst into tears. From
that mo­ment the manner of Hist lost all its irony and cool indifference, and
she became the fond caressing friend, again. Throwing her arms around the
afflicted girl, she attempted to soothe her sorrows, by the scarcely ever
failing remedy of feniale sym­pathy.

"Stop cry-no cry-" she said, wiping the tears from the face of Hetty, as she
would have performed the same office for a child, and stopping to press her
occasionally to her own warm bosom with the affection of a sister. "Why you
so trouble? You no make he book, if he be wrong, and you no make he pale face
if he wicked. There wicked red man, and wicked white man - no colour all good
- no colour all wicked. Chiefs know that well enough."

Hetty soon recovered from this sudden burst of grief, and then her mind
reverted to the purpose of her visit, with all its single-hearted
earnestness. Perceiving that the grim looking
196 The Deerslayer


chiefs were still standing around her in grave attention, she hoped that
another effort to convince them of the right might be successful.
"Listen, Hist," she said, struggling to suppress her sobs, and to speak
distinctly - "Tell the chiefs that it matters not what the wicked do-right is
right-The words of The Great Spirit are the words of The Great Spirit - and
no one can go harmless for doing an evil act, because another has done it
before him. 'Render good for evil,' says this book, and that is the law for
the red man as well as for the white man."

"Never hear such law among Delaware, or among Iro­quois-" answered Hist
soothingly. "No good to tell chiefs any such laws as dat. Tell 'em somet'ing
they believe."

Hist was about to proceed, notwithstanding, when a tap on the shoulder, from
the finger of the oldest chief caused her to look up. She then perceived that
one of the warriors had left the group, and was already returning to it with
Hutter and Hurry. Understanding that the two last were to become parties in
the inquiry, she became mute, with the unhesitating obe­dience of an Indian
woman. In a few seconds the prisoners stood face to face with the principal
men of the captors.

"Daughter," said the senior chief to the young Delaware, "ask this grey beard
why he came into our camp?"

The question was put by Hist, in her own imperfect Eng­lish, but in a way
that was easy to be understood. Hutter was too stern and obdurate by nature,
to shrink from the conse­quences of any of his acts, and he was also too
familiar with the opinions of the savages not to understand that nothing was
to be gained by equivocation or an unmanly dread of their anger. Without
hesitating, therefore, he avowed the purpose with which he had landed, merely
justifying it by the fact that the government of the province had bid high
for scalps. This frank avowal was received by the Iroquois, with evident
satisfaction, not so much, however, on account of the advantage it gave them
in a moral point of view, as by its proving that they had captured a man
worthy of occupying their thoughts and of becoming a subject of their
revenge. Hurry, when inter­rogated, confessed the truth, though he would have
been more disposed to concealment than his sterner companion, did
thecircumstances very well admit of its adoption. But he had tact enough to
discover that equivocation would be useless, at that moment, and he made a
merit of necessity by imitating a frankness, which, in the case of Hutter,
was the offspring of habits of indifference acting on a disposition that was
always ruthless, and reckless of personal consequences.

As soon as the chiefs had received the answers to their ques­tions, they
walked away, in silence, like men who deemed the matter disposed of, all
Hetty's dogmas being thrown away on beings trained in violence, from infancy
to manhood. Hetty and Hist were now left alone with Hutter and Hurry, no
visible restraint being placed on the movements of either; though all four,
in fact, were vigilantly and unceasingly watched. As respects the men, care
was had to prevent them from getting possession of any of the rifles, that
lay scattered about, their own included; and there all open manifestations of
watch­fulness ceased. But they, who were so experienced in Indian practices,
knew too well how great was the distance between appearances and reality, to
become the dupes of this seeming carelessness. Although both thought
incessantly of the means of escape, and this without concert, each was aware
of the uselessness of attempting any project of the sort that was not deeply
laid, and promptly executed. They had been long enough in the encampment, and
were sufficiently observant to have ascertained that Hist, also, was a sort
of captive, and, presuming on the circumstance, Hutter spoke in her presence,
more openly than he might otherwise have thought it prudent to do; inducing
Hurry to be equally unguarded by his exam­ple.

"I'll not blame you, Hetty, for coming on this errand, which was well meant
if not very wisely planned," commenced the father, seating himself by the
side of his daughter, and taking her hand; a sign of affection that this rude
being was ac­customed to manifest to this particular child. "But preaching,
and the bible, are not the means to turn an Indian from his ways. Has
Deerslayer sent any message; orhas he any scheme by which he thinks to get us
free?"

Ay, that's the substance of it!" put in Hurry. "If you can help us, gal, to
half a mile of freedom, or even a good start of a short quarter, I'll answer
for the rest. Perhaps the old man may want a little more, but for one of my
height and years that will meet all objections."
Hetty looked distressed, turning her eyes from one to the other, but she had
no answer to give to the question of the reckless Hurry.

"Father," she said, "neither Deerslayer, nor Judith knew of my coming, until
I had left the Ark. They are afraid the Iroquois will make a raft, and try to
get off to the hut, and think more of defending that, than of coming to aid
you."

"No-no-no-" said Hist hurriedly, though in a low voice, and with her face
bent towards the earth, in order to conceal from those whom she knew to be
watching them the fact of her speaking at all. "No - no - no - Deerslayer
different man. He no t'ink of defending 'self, with friend in danger. Help
one another, and all get to hut."

"This sounds well, old Tom," said Hurry, winking and laughing, though he too
used the precaution to speak low-"Give me a ready witted squaw for a fri'nd,
and though I'll not downright defy an Iroquois, I think I would defy the
devil."

"No talk loud," said Hist. "Some Iroquois got Yengeese
tongue, and all got Yengeese ear."

"Have we a friend in you, young woman?" enquired Hutter with an increasing
interest in the conference. "If so, you may calculate on a solid reward, and
nothing will be easier than to send you to your own tribe, if we can once
fairly get you off with us to the castle. Give us the Ark and the canoes, and
we can command the lake, spite of all the savages in the Canadas. Nothing but
artillery could drive us out of the castle, if we can get back to it.

"'S'pose 'ey come ashore to take scalp?" retorted Hist, with cool irony, at
which the girl appeared to be more expert than is common for her sex.

"Ay - ay - that was a mistake; but there is little use in
lamentations, and less still, young woman, in flings."'Father," said Hetty,
"Judith thinks of breaking open the big chest, in hopes of finding something
in that which may buy your freedom of the savages."

A dark look came over Hutter at the announcement of this fact, and he
muttered his dissatisfaction in a way to render it intelligible enough.

'What for no break open chest?" put in Hist. "Life sweeter than old chest -
scalp sweeter than old chest. If no tell darter to break him open, Wah-ta!-
Wah no help him to run away."

"Ye know not what ye ask-ye are but silly girls, and the wisest way for ye
both is to speak of what ye understand and to speak of nothing else. I little
like this cold neglect of the savages, Hurry; it's a proof that they think of
something serious, and if we are to do any thing, we must do it soon. Can we
count on this young woman, think you?"

"Listen-" said Hist quickly, and with an earnestness that proved how much her
feelings were concerned-"Wah-ta!-Wah no Iroquois - All over Delaware - got
Delaware heart - Delaware feeling. She prisoner, too. One prisoner help
t'udder prisoner. No good to talk more, now. Darter stay with fader - Wah-ta!
-Wah come and see friend-all look right- Then tell what he do."

This was said in a low voice, but distinctly, and in a manner to make an
impression. As soon as it was uttered the girl arose, and left the group,
walking composedly towards the hut she occupied, as if she had no further
interest in what might pass between the pale-faces.




Chapter XII.

"She speaks much of her father; says she hears,
There's tricks i' the world; and hems, and beats her breast;
Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense; her speech is nothing,
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to collection; -Hamlet, IV.v.4-9.



We left the occupants of the castle and the ark, buried in sleep. Once, or
twice, in the course of the night, it is true, "Deerslayer, or the Delaware,
arose and looked out upon the ranquil lake; when, finding all safe, each
returned to his and slept like a man who was not easily deprived of his
pallet,
natural rest. At the first signs of the dawn, the former arose, however, and
made his personal arrangements for the day; though his companion, whose
nights had not been tranquil, or without disturbances, of late, continued on
his blanket, until the sun had fairly risen; Judith too, was later than
common, that morning, for the earlier hours of the night had brought her
little of either refreshment, or sleep. But ere the sun had shown himself
over the eastern hills, these too were up and afoot, even the tardy in that
region seldom remaining on their pallets, after the appearance of the great
luminary.
Ghingachgook was in the act of arranging his forest toilet, when Deerslayer
entered the cabin of the Ark and threw him a few coarse but light summer
vestments that belonged to Hutter.

"Judith hath given me them for your use, chief," said the lat­ter, as he cast
the jacket and trousers at the feet of the Indian, 'for it's ag'in all
prudence and caution to be seen in your war dress and paint. Wash off all
them fiery streaks from your cheeks, put on these garments, and here is a
hat, such as it is, that will give you an awful oncivilized sort .of
civilization, as the missionaries call it. Remember that Hist is at hand, and
what we do for the maiden, must be done while we are doing for others. I know
it's ag'in your gifts and your natur' to wear clothes, unless they are cut
and carried in a red man's fashion,but make a vartue of necessity, and put
these on, at once, even if they do rise a little in your throat."

Chingachgook, or the Serpent, eyed the vestments with strong disgust; but he
saw the usefulness of the disguise, if not its absolute necessity. Should the
Iroquois discover a red-man, in or about the Castle, it might, indeed, place
them more on their guard, and give their suspicions a direction towards their
female captive. Any thing was better than a failure as it regarded his
betrothed, and, after turning the different garments round and round,
examining them with a species of grave irony, affecting to draw them on in a
way that defeated itself, and otherwise manifesting the reluctance of a young
savage to confine his limbs in the usual appliances of civilized life, the
chief submitted to the directions of his companion, and finally stood forth,
so far as the eye could detect, a red man in colour alone. Little was to be
apprehended from this last peculiarity, however, the distance from the shore,
and the want of glasses preventing any very close scrutiny, and Deerslayer,
himself, though of a brighter and fresher tint, had a countenance that was
burnt by the sun to a hue scarcely less red than that of his Mohican
companion. The awkwardness of the Delaware in his new attire, caused his
friend to smile, more than once that day, but he carefully abstained from the
use of any of those jokes, which would have been bandied among white men on
such an occasion, the habits of a chief, the dignity of a warrior on his
first path, and the gravity of the cir­cumstances in which they were placed,
uniting to render so much levity out of season.

The meeting at the morning meal of the three islanders, if we may use the
term, was silent, grave and thoughtful. Judith showed by her looks that she
had passed an unquiet night, while the two men had the future before them,
with its unseen and unknown events. A few words of courtesy passed between
Deerslayer and the girl, in the course of the breakfast, but no allusion was
made to their situation. At length Judith, whose heart was full, and whose
novel feelings disposed her to enter­tain sentiments more gentle and tender
than common, in­troduced the subject, and this in a way to show how much of
her thoughts it had occupied, in the course of the last sleepless night.

"It would be dreadful, Deerslayer,' the girl abruptly exclaimed, "should any
thing serious befall my father and Hetty! We cannot remain quietly here, and
leave them if: the hands of the Iroquois, without bethinking us of some means
of serving them."

"I'm ready, Judith, to sarve them, and a11 others who are in trouble, could
the way to do it be p'inted out. It's no trifling matter to fall into redskin
hands, when men set out on an ar'n'd like that which took Hutter and Hurry
ashore; that I know as well as another, and 1 would'n't wish my worst inimy
in such a strait, much less them with whom I've journeyed, and eat, and
slept. Have you any scheme, that you would like to have the Sarpent and me,
indivour to carry out?'

"I know of no other means to release the prisoners, than by bribing the
Iroquois. They are not proof against presents, and we might offer enough,
perhaps, to make them think it better to carry away what to them will be rich
gifts, than to carry away poor prisoners; if, indeed, they should carry them
away at all!"

"This is well enough, Judith; yes, it's well enough, if the inimy is to be
bought, and we can find articles to make the purchase with. Your father has a
convenient lodge, and it is most cunningly placed, though it does'n't seem
overstock'd with riches that will be likely to buy his ransom. There's the
piece he calls Killdeer, might count for something, and I understand there's
a keg of powder about, which might be a make weight, sprain; and yet two able
bodied men are not to be bought off for a trifle- besides- "

"Besides what?'' demanded Judith impatiently, observ'ing that the other
hesitated to proceed, probably from a reluctance to distress her.

'Why, Judith, the Frenchers offer bounties as well as our own side, and the
price of two scalps would purchase a keg of powder, and a rifle; though 1'11
not say one of the latter altogether as good as Killdeer, there, which your
father va'nts as uncommon, and unequalled, like. But fair powder, and a
pretty captain rifle; then the red men are not the expartest in fire arms,
and do'n't always know the difference atwixt that
which is ra'al, and that which is seeming."

''This is horriblel' muttered the girl, struck by the homely manner in which
her companion was accustomed to state his facts. "But you overlook my own
clothes, Deerslayer, and they, I think, might go far with the women of the
Iroquois."

"No doubt they would; no doubt they would. Judith," returned the other,
looking at her keenly, as if he would ascertain whether she were really
capable of making such a sacrifice. 'But, are you sustain, gal, you could and
it in your heart, to part with your own finery for such a purpose? Many is
the man who has thought he was valiant 'till danger stared him in the face;
l've known them, too, that conspired they were kind and ready to give away
all they had to the poor, when they've been listening to other people's hard
learnedness; but whose fists have clench'd as tight as the riven hickory when
it came to downright offerings of their own. Besides, Judith, you're
handsome- uncommon in that way, one might observe and do no harm to the
truth- and they that have beauty, like to have that which will adorn it. Are
you bargain you could find it in your heart to part with your own finery?'

The soothing allusion to the personal charms of the girl, was well timed, to
counteract the effect produced by the distrust that the young man expressed
of Judith's devotion to her filial duties. Had another said as much as
Deerslayer, the compliment would most probably have been overlooked in the
indignation awakened by the doubts, but even the unpolished sincerity, that
so often made this simple minded hunter bare his thoughts, had a charm for
the girl; and, while she colored, and, for an instant her eyes flashed fire,
she could not find it in her heart to be really angry with one whose very
soul seemed truth and manly kindness. Look her reproaches she did, but
conquering the desire to retort, she succeeded in answering in a mild and
friendly manner.

"You must keep all your favorable opinions, for the Delaware girls,
Deerslayer, if you seriously think thus of those of your own colour," she
said, affecting to laugh. 'But, try me; if you find that I regret either
hibbard or feather, silk or muslin, then may you think what you please of my
heart, and say what you think."

"That's justice! -The rarest thing to find on 'arth, is a truly just man. So
says Tamenund, the wisest prophet of the Delawares, and so all must think,
that have occasion to see, and talk and act among Mankind. I love a just man,
Sargent. His eyes are never covered with darkness towards his unifies, while
they are all sunshine and brightness towards his fri'nds. He uses the reason
that God has given him, and he uses it with ' a feelin' of his being ordered
to look at, and to consider things as they are, and not as he wants them to
be. It's easy enough to find men who call themselves just, but it's wonderful
oncommon to find them that are the very thing, in fact. How often have I seen
Indians; gal, who believed they were lookin' into a matter agreeable to the
will of the Great Spirit, when, in truth, they were only striving to act up
to their own will and pleasure, and this, half the time, with a temptation to
go wrong that could no more be seen by themselves, than the stream that runs
in the next valley, can be seen by us through yonder mountain', though any
looker on might have discovered it, as plainly as we can discover the parch
that are swimming around this hull'

"Very true, Deerslayer," rejoined Judith, losing every trace of displeasure
in a bright smile- "very true, and I hope to see you act on this love of
justice, in all matters in which I am concerned. Above all, I hope you will
judge for yourself, and not believe every evil story that a prating idler,
like Hurry Harry, may have to tell, that goes to touch the good name of any
young woman, who may not happen to have the same opinion of his face and
person that the blustering gallant has of himself."

"Hurry Harry's idlees do not pass for gospel with me, Judith; but even worse
than he may have eyes and ears", returned the other gravely.  "

"Enough of this" exclaimed Judith, with flashing eye and a flush that mounted
to her temples, "and more of my father and his ransom. "T' s you say,
Deerslayer; the Indians will not be likely to give up their prisoners,
without a heavier bribe than my clothes can offer, and father's rifle and
powder. There is the chest."

"Ay, there is, the chest, as you say. Judith, and when the question gets to
be between a secret and a scalp, I should think most men would prefer keeping
the last. Did your father ever give you any downright commands conserving
that chist?"


'Never. He has always appeared to think its locks, and its steel bands, and
its strength, its best protection."

"T'is a rare chest, and altogether of curious build," returned Deerslayer,
rising and approaching the thing in question, on which he seated himself,
with a view to examine it with greater ease. "Chingachgook, this is no wood
that comes of any forest that you or I have ever trailed through! 'T'is'n't
the black walnut, and yet it's quite as comely, if not more so, did the smoke
and the treatment give it fair play.''

The Delaware drew near, felt of the wood, examined its grain, endeavored to
indent the surface with a nail, and passed his hand curiously over the steel
bands, the heavy padlocks, and the other novel peculiarities of the massive
box. "No- nothing like this grows in these regions, "resumed Deerslayer.
"I've seen all the oaks, both the maples, the elms, the bass woods, all the
walnuts, the butternuts, and every tree that has a substance and colour,
wrought into some form or other, but never have I before seen such a wood as
this! Judith, the chest itself, would buy your father's freedom, or Iroquois
cur'osity isn't as strong as redskin cur'osity, in general; especially in the
matter of woods."

"The purchase might be cheaper made, perhaps, Deerslayer. The chest is full,
and it would be better to part with half than to part with the whole.
Besides, father- l know not why- but, father values that chest highly."

"He would seem to prize what it holds more than the chest, itself, judging by
the manner in which he treats the outside, and secures the inside. Here are
three locks, Judith; is there no key?'

"I've never seen one; and yet key there must be, since Hetty told us, she had
often seen the chest opened."

"Keys no more lie in the air, or float on the water, than humans, gal; if
there is a key, there must be a place in which it is kept."

''That is true, and it might not be difficult to find it, did we dare to
search!

''This is for you, Judith; it is altogether for you. The chist is your'n, or
your father's; and Hutter is your father, not mine. Cur'osity is a woman's,
and not a man's failing, and there you have got all the reasons before you.
If the chist has articles for ransom, it seems to me they would be wisely
used in redeem­ing their owner's life, or even in saving his scalp; but that
is a matter for your judgment, and not for ourn. When the lawful owner of a
trap, or a buck, or a canoe, is'n't present, his next of kin becomes his
riprisentyve by all the laws of the woods. We therefore leave you to say
whether the chist shall, or shall not be opened."

"I hope you do not believe I can hesitate, when my father's life's in danger,
Deerslayer'"

"Why, it's pretty much putting a scolding ag'in tears and mourning. It's not
onreasonable to foretell that old Tom may find fault with what you've done,
when he sees himself, once more, in his hut, here, but there's nothing
unusual in men s falling out with what has been done for their own good; I
dare to say that even the moon would seem a different thing from what it now
does, could we look at it from the other side."

"Deerslayer, if we can find the key, I will authorize you to open the chest,
and to take such things from it, as you may think will buy father's ransom."
"First find the key, gal; we'll talk of the rest a'terwards. Sar­pent, you've
eyes like a fly, and a judgment that's seldom out; can you help us, in
calculating where Floating Tom would be apt to keep the key of a chist that
he holds to be as private as this."

The Delaware had taken no part in the discourse, until he was thus directly
appealed to, when he quitted the chest, which had continued to attract his
attention, and cast about him for the place in which a key would be likely to
be concealed, under such circumstances. As Judith and Deerslayer were not
idle, the while, the whole three were soon engaged in an anxious and spirited
search. As it was certain that the desired key was not to be found in any of
the common drawers, or closets, of which there were several in the building,
none looked there, but all turned their enquiries to those places that struck
them as ingenious hiding places, and more likely to be used for such a
purpose. In this manner the outer room was thoroughly but fruitlessly
examined, when they entered the sleeping apart­ment of H utter. This part of
the rude building was better fur­nished than the rest of the structure,
containing several articles that had been especially devoted to the service
of the deceased wife, of its owner, but as Judith had all the rest of the
keys, it was soon rummaged, without bringing to light the particular key
desired.

They now entered the bed room of the daughters. Chin­gachgook was immediately
struck with the contrast between the articles, and the arrangement, of that
side of the room that might be called Judith's and that which more properly
belonged to Hetty. A slight exclamation escaped him, and pointing in each
direction he alluded to the fact in a low voice, speaking to his friend in
the Delaware tongue.

"Tis as you think, Sarpent," answered Deerslayer, whose remarks we always
translate into English, preserving as much as possible of the peculiar
phraseology and manner of the man, "Tis just so, as any one may see, and 'tis
all founded in natur'. One sister loves finery, some say overmuch; while
t'other is as meek and lowly as God ever created goodness and truth. Yet,
after all, I dare say that Judith has her vartues, and Hetty has her
failin's."

"And the 'Feeble-Mind' has seen the chist opened?" inquired Chingachgook,
with curiosity in his glance.

"Sartain; that much I've heard from her own lips; and, for that matter, so
have you. It seems her father does'n't misgive her discretion, though he does
that of his eldest darter."

"Then, the key is hid only from the Wild Rose'?" for so Chin­gachgook had
begun gallantly to term Judith, in his private discourse with his friend.
"That's it! That's just it! One he trusts, and the other he does'n't. There's
red and white in that, Sarpent, all tribes and nations agreeing in trusting
some, and refusing to trust other some. It depends on character and
judgment."

"Where could a key be put, so little likely to be found by the Wild Rose, as
among coarse clothes?"

Deerslayer started, and turning to his friend, with admira­tion expressed in
every lineament of his face, he fairly laughed, in his silent but hearty
manner, at the ingenuity and readiness of the conjecture.

"Your name's well bestowed, Sarpent- yes, 'tis well bestowed! Sure enough,
where would a lover of finery be so little likely to s'arch, as among
garments as coarse and onseemly as these of poor Hetty's. I dares to say,
Judith's delicate fingers have'n't touched a bit of cloth as rough and
oncomely as that petticoat, now, since she first made acquaintance with the
officers! Yet, who knows? The key may be as likely to be on the same peg, as
in any other place. Take down the garment, Delaware, and let us see if you
are ra'ally a prophet."
Chingachgook did as desired, but no key was found. A coarse pocket,
apparently empty, hung on the adjoining peg, and this was next examined. By
this time, the attention of Judith was called in that direction, and she
spoke hurriedly and like one who wished to save unnecessary trouble.

"Those are only the clothes of poor Hetty, dear simple girl!" she said,
"nothing we seek, would be likely to be there."

The words were hardly out of the handsome mouth of the speaker, when
Chingachgook drew the desired key from the pocket. Judith was too quick of
apprehension, not to under­stand the reason a hiding place so simple and
exposed, had been used. The blood rushed to her face, as much with
resent­ment perhaps, as with shame, and she bit her lip, though she continued
silent. Deerslayer and his friend now discovered the delicacy of men of
native refinement, neither smiling or even by a glance betraying how
completely he understood the motives and ingenuity of this clever artifice.
The former, who had taken the key from the Indian, led the way into the
adjoining room, and applying it to a lock ascertained that the right
in­strument had actually been found. There were three pad­locks, each of
which however was easily opened by this single key. Deerslayer removed them
all, loosened the hasps, raised the lid a little to make certain it was
loose, and then he drew back from the chest, several feet, signing to his
friend to follow.

"This is a family chist, Judith," he said, "and 'tis like to hold family
secrets. The Sarpent and I will go into the Ark, and look to the canoes, and
paddles, and oars, while you can ex­amine it by yourself, and find out
whether any thing that will be a make weight in a ransom, is, or is not,
among the articles. When you've got through, give us a call, and we'll all
sit in council, together, touching the valie of the articles."

"Stop, Deerslayer," exclaimed the girl, as he was about to withdraw. "Not a
single thing will I touch - I will not even raise the lid-unless you are
present. Father and Hetty have seen fit to keep the inside of this chest a
secret from me, and I am muc