e by this defiant, Deerslayer ?' 'Fairly enough. It lay not a
minot' since, in what you call Floatin' Tom's door yard.' How came it there ?
It never fell from the clouds, Judith, as little toads sometimes do, and then
it don't rain. You must prove t where it come from, Deerslayer, or we shall
suspect some design to skear them that would have lost their wits long ago,
if fear could drive 'em away.'

Deerslayer had approached a window, and cast a glance out of it, on the dark
aspect of the lake. As if satisfied with what he beheld, he drew near Hurry,
and took the bundle of sticks into his own hand, examining it attentively.

'Yes, this is an indian declination of war, sure enough,' he said, 'and it's
a proof how little you're suited to be on the path it has travelled, Harry
March, that it has got here, and you never the wiser as to the means. The
savages may have left the scalp on your head, but they must have taken off
the ears ; else you'd have heard the stirring of the water made by the lad as
he come off ag'n on his two logs. His ar'n'd was to throw these sticks at our
door, as much as to say, we've struck the war-pool since the trade, and the
next thing will be to strike you.

' 'The prowling wolves ! But hand me that rifle, Judith, and 1'11 send an
answer back to the vagabonds through their messenger.'

'Not while l stand by, Master March,' coolly put in Deerslayer, motioning for
the other to forbear. 'Faith is faith, whether given to a red-skin, or to a
Christian. The lad lighted a knot, and came off fairly, under its blaze, to
give us this warning ; and no man here should harm him, while empl'yed on
such an ar'n'd. There's no use in words, for the boy is too cunning to leave
the knot burning, now his business is done and  the night is already too dark
for a rifle to have any sartainty.

 'That may be true enough, as to a gun, but there's virtue still in a canoe,'
answered Hurry, passing towards the door with enormous strides, carrying a
rifle in his hands. "T'he being doesn't live that shall stop me from
following and bringing back that riptyle's scalp. The more on 'em that you
crush in the egg, the fewer there'll be to dart at you in the woods !'

Judith trembled like the aspen, she scarce knew why herself, though there was
the prospect of a scene of violence ; for if Hurry was fierce and overbearing
in the consciousness of his Vast strength, Deerslayer had about him the calm
determination that promises greater perseverance, and a resolution more
likely to effect its object. It was the stern, resolute eye of the latter,
rather than the noisy vehemence of the first, that excited her apprehensions.
Hurry soon reached the spot where the canoe Was fastened, but not before
Deerslayer had spoke in a quick, earnest voice to the Serpent, in Delaware.
The latter had been the frst, in truth, to hear the sounds of the oars, and
he nae gone upon the platform in jealous watchfulness. The light satisfied
him that a message was coming, and when the boy cast his bundle of sticks at
his feet, it neither moved his anger. nor induced surprise. He merely stood
at watch, rifle in hand, to make certain that no treachery lay behind the
defiance. As Deerslayer now called to him, he stepped into the canoe, and
quick as thought removed the paddles. Hurry was furious when he found that he
was deprived of the means of proceeding. He frst approached the Indian with
loud menaces, and even Deerslayer stood aghast at the probable consequences.
March shook his sledge-hammer fists, and flourished his arms, as he drew neat
the Indian, and all expected he would attempt to fell the Delaware to the
earth ; one of them, at least, was well award that such an experiment would
be followed by immediate bloodshed. But even Hurry was awed by the stern
composure of the chief, and he, too, knew that such a man was not to be
outraged with impunity ; he, therefore, turned to vent his rage on
Deerslayer, where he foresaw no consequences so terrible What might have been
the result of this second demonstration if completed, is unknown, since it
was never made.

"Hurry," said a gentle, soothing voice at his elbow, "it's wicked to be so
angry, and God will not overlook it. The Iroquois treated you well, and they
didn't take your scalp, though you and father wanted to take theirs.'

The influence of mildness on passion is well known. Hetty, too, had earned a
sort of consideration, that had never before been enjoyed by her, through the
self-devotion and decision of her recent conduct. Perhaps her established
mental imbecility by removing all distrust of a wish to control aided her
influence. Let the cause be as questionable as it might, the effect we
sufficiently certain. Instead of throttling his old fellow-traveler, Hurry
turned to the girl, and poured out a portion o discontent, if none of his
anger, in her attentive ears.

"Tis too bad, Hetty !'  he exclaimed ; "as bad as a county gaol or a lack of
beaver, to get a creator' into your very trap '' then to see it get off. As
much as six firrst quality skins, in valie,  has paddled off on them clumsy
logs, when twenty strokes of a  well-turned paddle, would overtake 'em. I say
in valie, for as to  the boy in the way of natur', he is only a boy, and is
worth
neither more nor less than one. Deerslayer. you've been ontru to your fri'nds
in letting such a chance slip through my fingers well as your own.'

The answer was given quietly, but with a voice as steady as a fearless
nature, and the consciousness of rectitude could make It. "I should have been
untrue to the right, had I done otherwise,' returned the Deerslayer, steadily
; "and neither you, nor any other man has authority to demand that much of
me. The lad came on a lawful business, and the meanest red-skin that roams
the woods, would be ashamed of not respecting his ar'n'd. But he' now far
beyond your reach, Master March, and there's little use in talking, like a
couple of women, of what can no longer be helped.'

So saying, Deerslayer turned away, like one resolved to waste no more words
on the subject, while Hutter pulled Harry by the sleeve, and led him into the
ark. There they sat long in private conference. In the mean time, the Indian
and his friend had their secret consultation; for, though it wanted some
three or four hours to the rising of the star, the former could not abstain
from canvassing his scheme, and from opening his heart to the other. Judith,
too, yielded to her softer feelings, and listened to the whole of Hetty's
artless narrative of what occurred after she landed. The woods had few
terrors for either of these girls, educated as they had been, and accustomed.
as they were to look out daily at their rich expanse or to wander beneath
their dark shades ; but the elder sister felt that she would have hesitated
about thus venturing alone into an Iroquois camp. Concerning Hist, Hetty was
not very communicative. She spoke of her kindness, and gentleness and of the
meeting in the forest; but the secret of Chingachgook was guarded with a
shrewdness and fidelity, that many a sharper-witted girl might have failed to
display.

At length the several conferences were broken up by the reappearance of
Hutter on the platform. Here he assembled the Whole party, and communicated
as much of his intentions as he deemed expedient. Of the arrangement made by
Deerslayer, to Abandon the castle during the night and to take refuge in the
ark, he entirely approved. It struck him as it had the others, as toe only
effectual means of escaping destruction. Now that the savages had turned
their attention to the construction of rafts, no doubt could exist of their,
at least, making an attempt to carry the building, and the message of the
bloody sticks sufficiently showed their confidence in their own success. In
short, the old man viewed the night as critical, and he called on all to t
ready as soon as possible, in order to abandon the dwellings uporarily at
least, if not forever.

These communications made, everything proceeded promptly and with
intelligence ; the castle was secured in the manner
ready described, the canoes were withdrawn from the dock kd fastened to the
ark by the side of the other ; the few necessaries that had been left in the
house, were transferred to the cabin, the fire was extinguished and all
embarked.

The vicinity of the hills, with their drapery of pines, had the fact to
render nights that were obscure, darker than common on the lake. As usual,
however, a belt of comparative light was retched through the centre of the
sheet, while it was within the dadoes of the mountains, that the gloom rested
most heavily on the water. Thee island, or castle, stood in this belt of
imperative light, but still the night was so dark, as to cover the aperture
of the ark. At the distance of an observer on the shore, her movements could
not be seen at all, more particularly as a background of dark hillside tilled
up the perspective of every view that was taken diagonally or directly across
the water. The prevailing wind on the lakes of that region is west, but owing
to be avenues formed by the mountains, it is frequently impossible to tell
the true direction of the currents, as they often vary within, short
distances, and brief differences of time. This is truer in light fluctuating
puffs of air, than in steady breezes; thou the squalls of even the latter are
familiarly known to be uncertain and baffling in all mountainous regions and
narrow raters. On the present occasion, Hutter himself. (as he shoved the ark
from her berth, at the side of the platform,) was at a loss to pronounce
which way the wind blew. In common, this difficulty was solved by the clouds,
which, floating high above no hill tops, as a matter of course obeyed the
currents; but now the whole vault of heaven seemed a mass of gloomy wall. Not
an opening of any son was visible, and Chingachgook we already trembling lest
the non-appearance of the star might prevent his betrothed from being
punctual to her appointment. Under these circumstances, Hutter hoisted his
sail, seemingly with the sole intention of getting away from the castle, as
it might be dangerous to remain much longer in its vicinity. The air soon
filled the cloth, and when the scow was got under command, and the sail was
properly trimmed, it was found that the direction was southerly, inclining
towards the eastern shore. No better course offering for the purposes of the
party, the singular craft was suffered to skim the surface of the water in
this direction for more than hour, when a change in the currents of the air
drove them over towards the camp.

Deerslayer watched all the movements of Hutter and Harry with jealous
attention. At first, he did not know whether to ascribe the course they held
to accident, or to design ; but he now began to suspect the latter. Familiar
as Hutter was with the lake, it was easy to deceive one who had little
practice on the water; and let his intentions be what they might, it was
evident, ere two hours had elapsed, that the ark had got sufficient space to
be within a hundred rods of the shore, directly abreast of the known position
of the camp. For a considerable time previously to reaching this point,
Hurry, who had some knowledge of the Algonquin language, had been in close
conference with the Indian, and the result was now announced by the latter to
Deerslayer, who had been a cold, not to say distrusted, looker-on of all that
passed.

"My old father, and my young brother, the Big Pine,' - for so the Delaware
had named March - "want  to see Huron scalps at their belts,' said
Chingachgook to his friend. "There is room for some on the girdle of the
Sarpent, and his people will look for them when he goes back to his village.
Their eyes must not be left long in a fog, but they must see what they look
for. I know that my brother has a white hand ; he will not strike even the
dead. He will wait for us ; when we come back, he will not hide his face from
shame for his friend. The great Serpent of the Mohicans must be worthy to go
on the war-path with Hawkeye.'

"Ay, ay, Sarpent, I see how it is ; that name's to stick, and in time I shall
get to be known by it instead of Deerslayer ; well, if such honours will
come, the humblest of us all must be willing to abide by 'em. As for your
looking for scalps, it belongs to your gifts, and I see no harm in it. Be
merciful. Sarpent, howsever ; be merciful, I beseech of you. It surely can do
no harm to a red-skin's honour to show a little mare. As for the Old man, the
father of two young women, who might ripen better feelin's in his heart, and
Harry March, here, who, pine as he is, might better bear the fruit of a more
christianized tree, as




CHAPTER 16

"I hear thee babbling to the vale
Of sunshine and of flowers,
But unto me thou bring'st a tale
Of visionary hours.'

	Wordsworth.


One discovery mentioned at the close of the preceding chapter, was of great
moment in the eyes of Deerslayer and his friend. In the First place, there
was the danger, almost the certainty, that Huger and Hurry would make a fresh
attempt on this camp, should they awake and ascertain its position. Then
there was the increased risk of landing to bring off Hist; and there were the
general uncertainty and additional hazards that must follow from the
circumstance that their enemies had begun to change their positions. As the
Delaware was aware that the hour was near when he ought to repair to the
rendezvous, he no longer thought of trophies torn from his foes, and one of
the first things arranged between him and his associate, was to permit the
two others to sleep on, lest they should disturb the execution of their plans
by substituting some of their own. ne ark moved slowly, and it would have
taken fully a quarter of an hour to reach the point, at the rate at which
they were going, thus affording time for a little forethought. The Indians,
in the wish to conceal their fire from those who were thought to be still in
the castle. had placed it so near the southern side of the point, as to
render it extremely difficult to shut it in by the bushes, though Deerslayer
varied the direction of the scow both to the right and to the left, in the
hope of being able to effect that object.

'There's one advantage, Judith, in Ending that fire so near the water,' he
said, while executing these little manœuvres, since it shows the Mingos
believe we are in the hut, and our coming on 'em from this quarter, will be
an unlooked for event. But it's lucky Harry March and your father are asleep,
else we should have 'em prowling after scalps ag'in. Ha! there - the bushes
are beginning to shut in the fire - and now it can't be seen at all !'
Deerslayer waited a little to make certain that he had at last gained the
desired position, when he gave the signal agreed on, and Chingachgook let go
the grapnel, and lowered the sail. The situation in which the ark now lay had
its advantages and its disadvantages. The fire had been hid by sheering
towards the shore, and the latter was nearer, perhaps, than was desirable.
Still, the water was known to be very deep further off in the lake, and
anchoring in deep water, under the circumstances in which the party was
placed, was to be avoided, if possible. It was also believed no raft could be
within mites ; and though the trees in the darkness appeared almost to
overhang the scow, it would not be easy to get off to her without using a
boat. The intense darkness that prevailed so close in with the forest, too,
served as an effectual screen, and so long as care was had not to make a
noise, there was little or no danger of being detected. All these things
Deerslayer pointed out to Judith, instructing her as to the course she was to
follow in the event of an alarm ; for it was thought to the last degree
inexpedient to arouse the sleepers, unless it might be in the greatest
emergency.

"And now, Judith, as we understand one another, it is time the Sarpent and I
had taken to the canoe," the hunter concluded. 'The star has not risen yet,
it's true, but it soon must, though none of us are likely to be any the wiser
for it to-night, on account of the clouds. Howsever, Hist has a ready mind,
and she's one of them that doesn't always need to have a thing afore her, to
see it. "I'll warrant you she'll not be either two minutes or two feet out of
the way, unless them jealous vagabonds, the Mingos, have taken the alarm, and
put her as a stool-pigeon to catch us, or have hid her away, in order to
prepare her mind for a Huron instead of a Mohican husband.'

'Deerslayer,' interrupted the girl, earnestly ; this is a most dangerous
service ; why do you go on it, at all ?'

"Anan ! - Why you know, gal, we go to bring off Hist, the Sarpent's betrothed
- the maid he means to marry, as soon as we get back to the tribe."

"That is all right for the indian - but you do not mean to marry Hist - you
are not betrothed, and why should two risk their lives and liberties, to do
that which one can just as well perform ?'

"Ah- now l understand you, Judith - yes, now I begin to take the idee. You
think as Hist is the Sarpent's betrothed, as they call it, and not mine, it's
altogether his affair ; and as one man can paddle a canoed he ought to be
left to go after his gal alone ! But you forget this is our ar'n'd here, on
the lake, and it would not tell well to forget an ar'n'd just as the pinch
came. Allen, if love does count for so much with some people, particularly
with young women, fri'ndship counts for some- thing, too, with other some. l
dares to say, the Delaware can paddle a canoe by himself, and can bring off
Hist by himself, and perhaps he would like that quite as well, as to have me
with him ; but he couldn't sarcumvent sarcumventions, or stir up an
ambushment, or light with the savages, and get his sweetheart at the same
time, as well by himself as if he had a fri'nd with him to depend on, even if
that fri'nd is no better than myself. No - no - Judith, you wouldn't desert
one that counted on you, at such a moment, and you can't, in reason, expect
me to do it.

"I fear - I believe you are right, Deerslayer, and yet I wish you were not to
go ! Promise me one thing, at least, and that is, not to trust yourself among
the savages, or to do anything more than to save the girl. That will be
enough for once, and with that you ought to be satisfied.'

"Lord bless you! gal; one would thik it was Hetty that;s talking, and not the
quick-witted, and wonderful Judith Hutter! But fright makes the wise silly,
and the strong weak. Yes, I've seen proofs of that, time and ag'in ! Well,
it's kind and softhearted in you, Judith, to feel this consign for a fellow
creator', and I shall always say that you are kind and of true feelings, let
them that envy your good looks, tell as many idle stories of you as they
may.'

'Deerslayer !' hastily said the girl, interrupting him, though nearly choked
by her own emotions ; "do you believe all you hear about a poor, motherless
girl ? Is the foul tongue of Harry Hurry to blast my life ?'

'Not it, Judith - not it. I've told Hurry it wasn't manful to backbite them
he couldn't win by fair means ; and that even an indian is always tender,
touching a young woman's good name.'

 'lf I had a brother, he wouldn't dare to do it !' exclaimed Judith, with
eyes flashing lire. "But, Ending me without any protector but an old man,
whose ears are getting to be as dull as his feelings, he has his way as he
pleases !'

"Not exactly that, Judith ; no, not exactly that, neither ! No man, brother
or stranger, would stand by and see as fair a gal as yourself hunted down,
without saying a word in her behalf. Hurry's in 'arnest in wanting to make
you his wife, and the little he does let out ag'in you, comes more from
jealousy, like, than from any thing else. Smile on him when he awakes, and
squeeze his hand only half as hard as you squeezed mine a bit ago, and my
life on it, the poor fellow will forget every thing but your comeliness. Hot
words don't always come from the heart, but oftener from the stomach, than
anywhere else. Try him, Judith, when he awakes, and see the virtue of a
smile.'

Deerslayer laughed, in his own manner, as he concluded, and then he intimated
to the patient-looking, but really impatient Chingachgook, his readiness to
proceed. As the young man entered the canoe, the girl stood immoveable as
stone, lost in the musings that the language and manner of the other were
likely to produce. The simplicity of the hunter had completely put her at
fault ; for, in her narrow sphere, Judith was an expert manager of the other
sex ; though in the present instance she was far more actuated by impulses,
in all she had said and done, than by calculation. We shall not deny that
some of Judith's reflections were bitter, though the sequel of the tale must
be referred to, in order to explain how merited, or how keen were her
sufferings.

Chingachgook, and his pale-face friend, set forth on their hazardous and
delicate enterprise, with a coolness and method that would have done credit
to men who were on their twentieth. instead of being on their first, war-
path. As suited his relation to the pretty fugitive, in whose service they
were engaged, the Indian took his place in the head of the canoe ; while
Deerslayer guided its movements in the stern. By this arrangement, the former
would be the first to land, and of course? the first to meet his mistress.
The latter had taken his post, without comment, but in secret influenced by
the reflection that one who had so much at stake as the indian, might not
possibly guide the canoe with the same steadiness and intelligence, as
another who had more command of his feelings. From the instant they left thc
side of the ark, the movements of the two adventurers were like the
manoeuvred of highly-drilled soldiers, who, for the first time were called on
to meet the enemy in the held. As yet, Chingachgook had never fired a shot in
anger, and the debut of his companion in warfare, is known to the reader. It
is true, the indian  had been hanging about his enemy's camp for a few hours,
on his first arrival, and he had even once entered it, as related in the last
chapter, but no consequences had followed either experiment. Now, it was
certain that an important result was to be effected, or a mortifying failure
was to ensue. The rescue, or the continued captivity of Hist, depended on the
enterprise. In a word, it was virtually the maiden expedition of these two
ambitious young forest soldiers ; and while one of them set forth, impelled
by sentiments that usually carry men so far, both had all their feelings of
pride and manhood enlisted in their success.

Instead of steering in a direct line to the point, then distant from the ark
less than a quarter of a mile, Deerslayer laid the head of his canoe
diagonally towards the centre of the lake, with a view to obtain a position,
from which he might approach the shore, having his enemies in his front only.
The spot where
Hetty had landed, and where Hist had promised to meet them, moreover, was on
the upper side of the projection, rather than on the lower ; and to reach it,
would have required the two adventurers to double nearly the whole point,
close in with the shore, had not this preliminary step been taken. So well
was the
necessity for this measure understood, that Chingachgook quietly paddled on,
although it was adopted without consulting him, and apparently was taking him
in a direction nearly opposite to that one might think he most wished to go.
A few
minutes sufficed, however, to carry the canoe the necessary distance, when
both the young men ceased paddling as it were by instinctive consent, and the
boat became stationary. The darkness increased rather than diminished, but it
was still possible, from the place where the adventurers lay, to distinguish
the outlines of the mountains. In vain did the Delaware turn his head
eastward, to catch a glimpse of the promised star ; for, notwithstanding the
clouds broke a little near the horizon, in that quarter of the heavens, the
curtain continued so far drawn as effectually to conceal all behind it. In
front, as was known by
the formation of land above and behind it. lay the point, at the distance of
about a thousand feet. No signs of the castle could Fe seen, nor could any
movement in that quarter of the lake reach the ear. The latter circumstance
might have been equally owing to the distance, which was several mites, or to
the fact that nothing was in motion. As for the ark, though scarcely farther
from the canoe than the point, it lay so completely buried in the shadows of
the shore, that it would not have been visible even had there been many
degrees more of light than actually existed.

The adventurers now held a conference in low voices, consult- ing together as
to the probable time. Deerslayer thought it wanted yet some minutes to the
rising of the star, while the impatience of the chief caused him to fancy the
night further advanced, and to believe that his betrothed was already waiting
his appearance on the shore. As might have been expected, the opinion of the
latter prevailed, and his friend disposed himself to steer for the place of
rendezvous. ne utmost skill and precaution now became necessary in the
management of the canoe. ne paddles were lifted, and returned to the water in
a noiseless manner ; and when within a hundred yards of the beach,
Chingachgook took in his, altogether laying his hand on his rifle in its
stead. As they got still more within the belt of darkness that girded the
wolds, it was seen that they were steering too far north, and the course was
altered accordingly. ne canoe now seemed to move by instinct, so cautious and
deliberate were all its motions. Still it continued to advance, until its
bows grated on the gravel of the beach, at the precise spot where Hetty had
landed, and whence her voice had issued, the previous night, as the ark was
passing. There was, as usual, a narrow strand, but bushes fringed the wolds,
and in most places overhung the water.

Chingachgook stepped upon the beach, and cautiously examined it, for some
distance, on each side of the canoe. In order to do this, he was often
obliged to wade to his knees in the lake, but no Hist rewarded his search.
When he returned, he found his friend also on the shore. They next conferred
in whispers, the Indian apprehending that they must have mistaken the place
of rendezvous. But Deerslayer thought it was probable they had mistaken the
hour. While he was yet speaking, he grasped the arm of the Delaware, caused
him to turn his head in the direction of the lake, and pointed towards the
summits of the eastern mountains. ne clouds had broken a little, apparently
behind rather than above the hills, and the evening star was glittering among
the branches of a pine. This was every way a flattering omen, and the young
men leaned on their rifles, listening intently! for the sound of approaching
footsteps. Voices they often heard, and mingled with them were the suppressed
cries of children, and the low but sweet laugh of indian women. As the native
Americans are habitually cautious, and seldom break out in loud conversation,
the adventurers knew by these facts, that they must be very near the
encampment. It was easy to perceive that there was a fire within the wolds,
by the manner in which some of the upper branches of the trees were
illuminated. but it was not possible, where they stood, to ascertain exactly
how near it was to themselves. Once or twice, it seemed as if stragglers from
around the fired were approaching the place of rendezvous ; but these sounds
were either altogether illusion, or those who had drawn near, returned again
without coming to the shore. A quarter of an hour was passed in this state of
intense expectation and anxiety, when Deerslayer proposed that they should
circle the point in the canoe ; and by getting a position close in, where the
camp could be seen, reconnoitre the Indians, and thus enable themselves to
form some plausible conjectures for the non-appearance of Hist. The Delaware,
however, resolutely refused to quit the spot, reasonably enough offering as a
reason, the disappointment of the girl, should she arrive in his absence.
Deerslayer felt for his friend's concern, and offered to make the circuit of
the point by himself, leaving the latter concealed in the bushes to await the
occurrence of any fortunate event that might favour his views. With this
understanding, then, the parties separated.

As soon as Deerslayer was at his post again, in the stern of the canoe, he
left the shore with the same precautions, and in the same noiseless manner,
as he had approached it. On this occasion he did not go far from the land,
the bushes affording a sufficient cover, by keeping as close in as possible.
Indeed, it would not have been easy to devise any means more favourable to
reconnoitring round an indian camp, than those afforded by the actual state
of things. The formation of the point permitted the place to be circled on
three of its sides, and the progress of the boat was so noiseless as to
remove any apprehensions from an alarm through sound. The most practised and
guarded foot might stir a bunch of leaves, or snap a dried stick in the dark,
but a bark canoe could be made to float over the surface of smooth water,
almost with the instinctive readiness, and certaininly with the noiseless
movements of an aquatic bird.

Deerslayer had got nearly in a line between the camp and the ark, before he
caught a glimpse of the fire. This came upon him suddenly, and a little
unexpectedly, at first causing an alarm, lest he had incautiously ventured
within the circle of light it cast. But perceiving at a second glance, that
he was certainly safe from detection, so long as the Indians kept near the
centre of the illumination, he brought the canoe to a state of rest, in the
most favourable position he could find, and commenced his observations.

We have written much, but in vain, concerning this extraordinary being, if
the reader requires now to be told, that, untutored as he was in the learning
of the world, and simple as he ever showed himself to be in all matters
touching the subtleties of conventional taste, he was a man of strong,
native, poetical feeling. He loved the wolds for their freshness, their
sublime solitudes, their vastness, and the impress that they everywhere bore
of the divine hand of their creator. He seldom moved through them, without-
pausing to dwell on some peculiar beauty that gave him pleasure, though
seldom attempting to investigate the causes ; and never did a day pass
without his communing in spirit, and this, too, without the aid of forms or
language, with the infinite source of all he saw, felt, and beheld. Thus
consti- tuted, in a moral sense, and of a steadiness that no danger could
appal, or any crisis disturb, it is not surprising that the hunted felt a
pleasure at looking on the scene he now beheld, that momentarily caused him
to forget the object of his visit. This , will more fully appear when we
describe the scene. .: The canoe lay in front of a natural vista, not only
through the bushes that lined the shore, but of the trees also, that afforded
a  clear view of the camp. It was by means of this same opening that the
light had been first seen from the ark. In consequence t f their recent
change of ground, the Indians had not yet retired to to their huts, but had
been delayed by their preparations, which t included lodging as well as food.
A large fire had been made, as ) much to answer the purpose of torches as for
the use of their  simple cookery ; and at this precise moment it was blazing
high and bright, having recently received a large supply of dried  brush. the
effect was to illuminate the arches of the forest, and to render the whole
area occupied by the camp as light as if hundreds of tapers were burning.
Most of the toil had ceased, and even the hungriest child had satisfied its
appetite. In a word, the time was that moment of relaxation and general
indolence which is apt to succeed a hearty meal. and when the labours of the
day have ended. ne hunters and the fishermen had been ttally successful ; and
food, that one great requisite of savage life, being abundant, every other
care appeared to have subsided in the sense of enjoyment dependent on this
all-important fact.

Deerslayer saw at a glance that many of the warriors were absent. His
acquaintance Rivenoak, however, was present, being seated in the foreground
of a picture that Salvator Rosa would have delighted to draw, his swarthy
features illuminated as much by pleasure as by the torchlike flame, while he
showed another of the tribe one of the elephants that had caused so much
sensation among his people. A boy was looking over his shoulder, in dull
curiosity, completing the group. More in the background eight or ten warriors
lay half recumbent on the ground, or sat with their backs reclining against
trees, so many types of indolent repose. Their arms were near them all,
sometimes leaning against the same trees as themselves, or were lying across
their bodies in careless preparation. But the group that most attracted the
attention of Deerslayer was that composed of the women and children. A1l the
females appeared to be collected together, and, almost as a matter of course,
their young were near them. The former laughed and chatted in their rebuked
and quiet manner, though one who knew the habits of the people might have
detected that every thing was not going on in its usual train. Most of the
young women seemed to be light-hearted enough ; but one old hag was seated
apart with a watchful soured aspect, which the hurter at once knew betokened
that some duty of an unpleasant character had been assigned her by the
chiefs. What that duty was, he had no means of knowing ; but he felt
satisfied it must be, in some measure connected with her own sex, the aged
among the women generally being chosen for such offices and no other.

As a matter of course, Deerslayer looked eagerly and anxiously for the form
of Hist. She was nowhere risibles though tee light penetrated to considerable
distances in all directions around the fire. Once or twice he started, as he
thought he recognized her laugh; but his ears were deceived by the soft
melody that is so common to the indian female voice. At length the old woman
spoke loud and angrily, and then he caught a glimpse of one or two dark
figures in the back-ground of trees, which turned as if obedient to the
rebuke, and walked more within the circle of the light. A young warrior's
form first came fairly into view; then followed two youthful females, one of
whom proved to be the Delaware girl. Deerslayer now comprehended it all. Hist
was watched, possibly by her young companion, certainly by the old woman. The
youth was probably some suitor of either her or her companion; but even his
discretion was distrusted under the influence of his admiration. ne known
vicinity of those who might be supposed to be her friends, and the arrival of
a strange red-man on the lake had induced more than the usual care, and the
girl had not been able to slip away from those who watched her? in order to
keep her appointment. Deerslayer traced her uneasiness, by her attempting
once or twice to look up through the branches of the trees, as if
endeavouring to get glimpses of the star she had herself named as the sign
for meeting. All was vain however, and after strolling about the camp a
little longer, in affected indifference, the two girls quitted their male
escort, and took seats among their own sex. As soon as this was done, the old
sentinel changed her place to one more agreeable to herself, a certain proof
that she had hitherto been exclusively on watch.

Deerslayer now felt greatly at a loss how to proceed. He well knew that
Chingachgook could never be persuaded to return to the ark, without making
some desperate effort for the recovery of his mistress, and his own generous
feelings well disposed him to aid in such an undertaking. He thought he saw
the signs of an intention among the females to retire for the night; and
should he remain, and the fire continue to give out its light, he might
discover the particular hut or arbour under which Hist reposed ; a
circumstance that would be of infinite use in their future proceedings.
Should he remain, however, much longer where he was, there was great danger
that the impatience of his friend would drive him into some act of
imprudence. At each instant, indeed, he expected to see the swarthy form of
the Delaware appearing in the background, like the tiger prowling around the
fold. Taking all things into consideration, therefore, he came to the
conclusion it would be better to rejoin his friend, and endeavour to temper
his impetuosity by some of his own coolness and discretion. It required but a
minute or two to put this plan in execution, the canoe returning to the
strand some ten or fifteen minutes after it had left it.

Contrary to his expectations, perhaps, Deerslayer found the Indian at his
post, from which he had not stirred, fearful that his betrothed might arrive
during his absence. A conference followed, in which Chingachgook was made
acquainted with the state of things in the camp. When Hist named the point as
the place of meeting, it was with the expectation of making her escape from
the old position, and of repairing to a spot that she expected to find
without any occupants; but the sudden change of localities had disconcerted
all her plans. A much greater degree of vigilance than had been previously
required was now emissary; and the circumstance that an aged woman was on
watch, also denoted some special grounds of alarm. All these considerations,
and many more that will readily suggest them- selves to the reader? were
briefly discussed before the young men came to any decision. The occasion,
however, being one that required act: instead of words, the course to be
pursued was soon chosen.

Disposing of the canoe in such a manner that Hist must see it, should she
come to the place of meeting previously to their return, the young men looked
to their arms. and prepared to enter the wood. The whole projection into the
lake contained about two acres of land; and the part that formed the point,
and on which the camp was placed, did not compose a surface of more than half
that size. It was principally covered with oaks, which, as is usual in the
American forests, grew to a great height without throwing out a branch, and
then arched in a dense and rich foliage. Beneath, except the fringe of thick
bushes along the shore, there was very little underbrush; though, in
consequence of their shape, the trees were closer together than is common in
regions where the axe has been freely used, resembling tall, straight, rustic
columns, upholding the usual canopy of leaves. The surface of the land was
tolerably even, but it had a small rise near its centre, which divided it
into a northern and southern half. On the latter, the Hurons had built their
fire, profiting by the formation to conceal it from their enemies, who, it
will be remembered, were supposed to be in the castle, which bore northerly.
A brook also came brawling down the sides of the adjacent hills, and found
its way into the lake on the southern ' Side of the point. It had cut for
itself a deep passage through Some of the higher portions of the ground, and,
in later days, When this spot has become subjected to the uses of
civilization, by its windings and shaded banks, it has become no mean
accessory in contributing to the beauty of the place. This brook lay west of
the encampment, and its waters found their way into the great reservoir of
that region on the same side, and quite near to the spot chosen for the fire.
All these peculiarities, so far as circumstances allowed, had been noted by
Deerslayer, and explained to his friend.

The reader will understand that the little rise in the ground, that lay
behind the Indian encampment, greatly favoured the secret advance of the two
adventurers. It prevented the light of the fire diffusing itself on the
ground directly in the rear, although the land fell away towards the water,
so as to leave what might be termed the left, or eastern flank of the
position unprotected by this covering. We have said unprotected , though that
is not properly the word since the knoll behind the huts and the Ere, offered
a cover for those who were now stealthily approaching, rather than any
protection to the Indians. Deerslayer did not break through the fringe of
bushes immediately abreast of the canoe, which might have brought him too
suddenly within the influence of the light, since the hillock did not extend
to the water; but he followed the beach northerly: until he had got nearly on
the opposite side of the tongue of land, which brought him under the shelter
of the low acclivity, and consequently more in the shadow. .

As soon as the friends emerged from the bushes, they stopped  to reconnoitre.
The fire was still blazing behind the little ridge casting its light upward,
into the tops of the trees, producing an l effect that was more pleasing than
advantageous. Still the glare had its uses; for, while the background was in
obscurity, the foreground was in strong light; exposing the savages and
concealing their foes. Profiting by the latter circumstance, '1 evinced
cautiously towards the ridge, Deerslayer dfc young men a in front, for he
insisted on this arrangement, lest the Delaw should be led by his feelings
into some indiscretion. It required but a moment to reach the foot of the
little ascent, and commenced the most critical part of the enterprise. Moving
with  exceeding caution, and trailing his rifle, both to keep its barrel out
of view, and in readiness for service, the hunter put before foot, until he
had got sufficiently high to over-look summit, his own head being alone
brought into the ' Chingachgook was at his side and both paused to take
another close examination of the camp. In order, however, to protect
themselves against any straggler in the rear, they placed their bodies
against the trunk of an oak, standing on the side next the fire.

The view that Deerslayer now obtained of the camp, was exactly the reverse of
that he had perceived from the water. The dim figures which he had formerly
discovered must have been on the summit of the ridge, a few feet in advance
of the spot where he was now posted. The lire was still blazing brightly and
around it were seated on logs, thirteen warriors, which accounted for all
whom he had seen from the canoe. They were conversing, with much earnestness
among themselves, the image of the elephant passing from hand to hand. The
first burst of savage wonder had abated, and the question now under
discussion, was the probable existence, the history and the habits of so
extraordinary an animal. We have not leisure to record the opinions of these
rude men on a subject so consonant to their lives and experience; but little
is hazarded in saying that they were quite as plausible, and far more
ingenious, than half the conjectures that precede the demonstrations of
science. However much they may have been at fault, as to their conclusions
and inferences, it is certain that they discussed the questions with a
zealous and most undivided attention. For the time being, all else was
forgotten, and our adventurers could not have approached at a more fortunate
instant.

The females were collected near each other, much as Deer slayer had last seen
them, nearly in a line between the place where he now stood and the fire. The
distance from the oak against which the young men leaned, and the warriors,
was about thirty yards; the women may have been half that number of yards
nigher. The latter, indeed, were so near as to make the utmost
circumspection, as to motion and noise, indispensable. Although they
conversed in their low, soft voices, it was Possible, in the profound
stillness of the wolds, even to catch Passages of the discourse; and the
light-hearted laugh that escaped the girls, might occasionally have reached
the canoe. Deerslayer felt the tremolo that passed through the frame of his
friend when the latter first caught the sweet sounds that issued from the
plump, pretty lips of Hist. He even laid a hand on the shoulder of the
Indian, as a sort of admonition to command himself. As the conversation grew
more earnest, each leaned forward to listen.

"The Hurons have more curious beasts than that,' said one of the girls,
contemptuously, for, like the men, they conversed of the elephant and his
qualities. 'The Delawares will think this creature wonderful, but tomorrow no
Huron tongue will talk of it. Our young men will End him if the animals dare
to come near our wigwams !'

This was, in fact, addressed to Wah-ta -Wah, though she who spoke uttered her
words with an assumed diffidence and humility, that prevented her looking at
the other.

The Delawares are so far from letting such creatures come into their
country,' returned Hist, "that no one has even seen their images there !
Their young men would frighten away the images as well as the beasts.'

"The Delaware young men! - the nation is women - even the deer walk when they
hear their hunters coming! Who has ever heard the name of a young Delaware
warrior ?'

This was said in good-humour, and with a laugh; but it was
also said bitingly. That Hist so felt it, was apparent by the spirit
betrayed in her answer.

'Who has ever heard the name of a young Delaware ?' she repeated earnestly.
Tamenund, himself, though now as old as the pines on the hill, or as the
eagles in the air, was once young; his name was heard from the great salt
lake, to the sweet waters of the west. What is the family of Uncas? Where is
another as
great, though the palefaces have ploughed up its grates, and trodden on its
bones ? Do the eagles fly as high, is the deer as swift or the panther as
brave ? Is there no young warrior of that Let the Huron maidens open their
eyes wider, and they may see one called Chingachgook, who is as stately as a
young ash, and as tough as the hickory.'

As the girl used her figurative language and told her companions to topes
their eyes, and they would see' the Delaware, Deerslayer thrust his angers
into the sides of his friend, and indulged in a fit of his hearty, benevolent
laughter, tne other smiled ; but the language of the speaker was too
flattering, and
the tones of her voice too sweet for him to be led away by any accidental
coincidence, however ludicrous. The speech of Hist produced a retort, and the
dispute, though conducted in good-humour, and without any of the coarse
violence of tone and gesture that often impairs the charms of the sex in what
is called civilized life, grew warm and slightly clamorous. In the midst of
this scene, the Delaware caused his friend to stoop, so as completely to
conceal himself, and then he made a noise so closely resembling the little
chirrup of the smallest species of the American squirrel, that Deerslayer
himself, though he had heard the imitation a hundred times, actually thought
it came from one of the little animals skipping about, over his head. ne
sound is so familiar in the woods, that none of the Hurons paid it the least
attention. Hist, however, instantly ceased talking, and sat motionless. Still
she had sufficient self-command to abstain from turning her head. She had
heard the signal by which her lover so often called her from the wigwam to
the stolen interview, and it came over her senses and her heart, as the
serenade affects the maiden in the land of song.

From that moment, Chingachgook felt certain that his presence was known. This
was effecting much, and he could now hope for a bolder line of conduct on the
part of his mistress than she might dare to adopt under an uncertainty of his
situation. It left no doubt of her endeavouring to aid him in his effort to
release her. Deerslayer arose as soon as the signal was given, and though he
had never held that sweet communion which is known only to lovers, he was not
slow to detect the great change that had come over the manner of the girl.
She still affected to dispute, though it was no longer with spirit and
ingenuity, but what she said was uttered more as a lure to draw her
antagonists on to an easy conquest, than with any hopes of succeeding
herself. Once or twice, it is true, her native readiness suggested a retort,
or an argument that raised a laugh, and gave her a. momentary advantage; but
these little sallies, the offspring of mother-wit, served the better to
conceal her real feelings, and to give to the triumph of the other party a
more natural air than it might have possessed without them. At length the
disputants became wearied, and they rose in a body as if about to separate.
It was now that Hist, for the first time, ventured to turn her face in the
direction whence the signal had come. In doing this, her movements were
natural, but guarded, and she stretched her arm and yawned, as if overcome
with a desire to sleep. The Chirrup was again heard, and the girl felt
satisfied as to the Position of her lover, though the strong light in which
she herself Was placed, and the comparative darkness in which the adventurers
stood, prevented her from seeing their heads, the only portions of their
forms that appeared above the ridge at all. The tree against which they were
posted had a dark shadow cast upon it by the intervention of an enormous pine
that grew
between it and the fire, a circumstance which alone would have rendered
objects within its cloud invisible at any distance. This Deerslayer well
knew, and it was one of the reasons why he had
selected this particular tree.

The moment was near when it became necessary for Hist to act. She was to
sleep in a small hut, or bower, that had been built near where she stood, and
her companion was the aged hag already mentioned. Once within the hut, with
this sleepless old woman stretched across the entrance, as was her nightly
pratice, the hope of escape was nearly destroyed, and she might at any moment
be summoned to her bed. Luckily, at this instant, one of the warriors called
to the old woman by name, and bade her bring him water to drink. There was a
delicious spring on the northern side of the point, and the hag took a gourd
from a branch, and summoning Hist to her side, she moved towards the summit
of the ridge, intending to descend and cross the point to the natural
fountain. All this was seen and understood by the adventurers, and they fell
back into the obscurity, concealing their persons by trees, until the two
females had passed them. In walking, Hist was held tightly by the hand. As
she moved by the tree that hid Chingachgook and his friend: the former felt
for his tomahawk, with the intention to bury it in the brain of the woman.
But the other saw the hazard of such a measure, since a single scream might
bring all the warriors upon them, and he was averse to the act on
considerations of humanity. His hand, therefore, prevented the blow. Still as
the two moved past, the chirrup was repeated, and the Huron woman stopped and
faced the tree whence the sounds seemed to proceed, standing, at the moment,
within six feet of her enemies. She expressed her surprise that a squirrel
should be in motion at so late an hour, and said it boded evil. Hist answered
that she had heard the same squirrel three times within the last twenty
minutes, and that she supposed it was waiting to obtain '
some of the crumbs left from the late supper. This explanation appeared
satisfactory, and they moved towards the spring, the men following stealthily
and closely. The gourd was filled, and the old woman was hurrying back, her
hand still grasping the wrist of the girl, when she was suddenly seized so
violently by the throat as to cause her to release her captive, and to
prevent her making any other sound than a sort of gurgling, suffocating else.
The Serpent passed his arm round the waist of his mistress and dashed through
the bushes with her, on the north side of the point. Here he immediately
turned along the beach, and ran towards the canoe. A more direct course could
have been taken,
but it might have led to a discovery