t the rest of the
world seemed to be cut off from her, and she had now additional reasons for
wishing to pass the remainder of her life on the lake, where she had already
seen so many bright and so many sorrowing days.

There yet remained more letters to examine. Judith found these were a
correspondence between her mother and Thomas Hovey. The originals of both
parties were carefully arranged, letter and answer, side by side; and they
told the early history of the connection between the ill-assorted pair far
more plainly than Judith wished to learn it. Her mother made the advances
towards a marriage, to the surprise, not to say horror of her daughter, and
she actually found a relief when she discovered traces of what struck her as
insanity- or a morbid desperation, bordering on that dire calamity- in the
earlier letters of that ill-fated woman. The answers of Hovey were coarse and
illiterate, though they manifested a sufficient desire to obtain the hand of
a woman of singular personal attractions, and whose great error he was
willing to overlook for the advantage of possessing one, every way so much
his superior, and, who, it also appeared was not altogether destitute of
money. The remainder of this part of the correspondence was brief, and it was
soon confined to a few communications on business, in which the miserable
wife hastened the absent husband in his preparations to abandon a world,
which there was a sufficient reason to think was as dangerous to one of the
parties, as it was disagreeable to the other. But a sincere expression had
escaped her mother, by which Judith could get a clue to the motives that had
induced her to marry Hovey, or Hutter, and this she found was that feeling of
resentment which so often tempts the injured to inflict wrongs on themselves,
by way of heaping coals on the heads of those through whom they have
suffered. Judith had enough of the spirit of that mother, to comprehend this
sentiment, and for a moment did she see the exceeding folly which permitted
such revengeful feelings to get the ascendancy.

There, what may be called the historical part of the papers ceased. Among the
loose fragments, however, was an old newspaper that contained a proclamation
offering a reward for the apprehension of certain free-booters by name, among
which was that of Thomas Hovey. The attention of the girl was drawn to the
proclamation and to this particular name, by the circumstance that black
lines had been drawn under both, in ink. Nothing else was found among the
papers that could lead to a discovery of either the name or the place of
residence of the wife of Hurter. All the dates, signatures, and addresses,
had been cut from the letters, and wherever a word occurred in the body of
the communications, that might furnish a clue, it was scrupulously erased.
Thus Judith found all her hopes of ascertaining who her parents were,
defeated, and she was obliged to fall back on her own resources and habits
for every thing connected with the future. Her recollection of her mother's
manners, conversation, and sufferings filled up many a gap in the historical
facts she had now discovered, and the truth, in its outlines, stood
sufficiently distinct before her, to take away all desire, indeed, to possess
any more details. Throwing herself back in her seat, she simply desired her
companion to finish the examination of the other articles in the chest, as it
might yet contain something of importance.

"I'll do it, Judith; I'll do it," returned the patient Deerslayer, "but if
there's many more letters to read, we shall see the sun ag'in, afore you've
got through with the reading of communications on business, in which the
miserable wife hastened the absent husband in his preparations to abandon a
world, which there was a sufficient reason to think was as dangerous to one
of the parties, as it was disagreeable to the other. But a sincere expression
had escaped her mother, by which Judith could get a clue to the motives that
had induced her to marry Hovey, or Hutter, and this she found was that
feeling of resentment which so often tempts the injured to inflict wrongs on
themselves, by way of heaping coals on the heads of those through whom they
have suffered. Judith had enough of the spirit of that mother, to comprehend
this sentiment, and for a moment did she see the exceeding folly which
permitted such revengeful feelings to get the ascendancy.

There, what may be called the historical part of the papers ceased. Among the
loose fragments, however, was an old newspaper that contained a proclamation
offering a reward for the apprehension of certain free-booters by name, among
which was that of Thomas Hovey. The attention of the girl was drawn to the
proclamation and to this particular name, by the circumstance that black
lines had been drawn under both, in ink. Nothing else was found among the
papers that could lead to a discovery of either the name or the place of
residence of the wife of Hurter. All the dates, signatures, and addresses,
had been cut from the letters, and wherever a word occurred in the body of
the communications, that might furnish a clue, it was scrupulously erased.
Thus Judith found all her hopes of ascertaining who her parents were,
defeated, and she was obliged to fall back on her own resources and habits
for every thing connected with the future. Her recollection of her mother's
manners, conversation, and sufferings filled up many a gap in the historical
facts she had now discovered, and the truth, in its outlines, stood
sufficiently distinct before her, to take away all desire, indeed, to possess
any more details. Throwing herself back in her seat, she simply desired her
companion to finish the examination of the other articles in the chest, as it
might yet contain something of importance.

"I'll do it, Judith; I'll do it," returned the patient Deerslayer, "but if
there's many more letters to read, we shall see the sun ag'in, afore you've
got through with the reading of much as if the bargain was made, and
Rivenoak, or any of the other vagabonds, was here to accept and close the
treaty, there's two principal reasons why it can never come to pass, which
may be as well told at once, in order no onlikely expectations may be raised
in you, or any onjustiflable hopes in me."

"What reason can there be, if Hetty and I are willing to part with the
trifles for your sake, and the savages are willing to receive them?"

"That's it, Judith-you've got the idees, but they're a little out of their
places, as if a hound should take the back'ard instead of the leading scent.
That the Mingos will be willing to receive them things, or any more like 'em,
you may have to offer is probable enough, but whether they'll pay valie for
'em, is quite another matter. Ask yourself, Judith, if any one should send
you a message to say that, for such or such a price, you and Hetty might have
that chist and all it holds, whether you'd think it worth your while to waste
many words on the bargain?"

"But this chest and all it holds, are already ours; there is no reason why we
should purchase what is already our own."

"Just so the Mingos caculate! They say the chist is theirn, already; or, as
good as theirn, and they'll not thank anybody for the key."

"I understand you, Deerslayer; surely we are yet in posses sion of the lake,
and we can keep possession of it, until Hurry sends troops to drive off the
enemy. This we may certainly do, provided you will stay with us, instead of
going back and giving yourself up a prisoner, again, as you now seem deter
mined on".

"That Hurry Harry should talk in thisaway, is nat'ral, and according to the
gifts of the man. He knows no better, and, therefore, he is little likely to
feel, or to act any better; but, Judith, I put it to your heart and
conscience-would you, could you think of me as favorably, as I hope and
believe you now do, was I to forget my furlough and not go back to the camp?"

"To think more favorably of you than I now do, Deerslayer, would not be easy;
but I might continue to think as favor ably-at least it seems so-I hope I
could, for, a world would n't tempt me to let you do any thing that might
change my real opinion of you."

"Then do n't try to entice me to overlook my furlough, gal! -A furlough is a
sacred thing among warriors and men that carry their lives in their hands, as
we of the forests do, and what a grievous disapp'intment would it be to old
Tamenund, and to Uncas, the father of the Sarpent, and to my other fri'nds in
the tribe, if I was so to disgrace myself, on my very first war-path? This
you will pairceive, moreover, Judith, is without laying any stress on nat'ral
gifts, and a white man's duties, to say nothing of conscience. The last is
king with me, and I try never to dispute his orders."

"I believe you are right, Deerslayer," returned the girl, after a little
reflection and in a saddened voice: "a man like you, ought not to act, as the
selfish and dishonest would be apt to act; you must, indeed, go back. We will
talk no more of this, then. Should I persuade you to any thing for which you
would be sorry hereafter, my own regret would not be less than yours. You
shall not have it to say, Judith-I scarce know by what name to call myself,
now!"
"And why not?-Why not, gal? Children take the names of their parents,
nat'rally, and by a sort of gift, like, and why should n't you and Hetty do,
as others have done afore ye? Hutter was the old man's name, and Hurter
should be the name of his darters; -at least until you are given away in
lawful and holy wedlock."
"I am Judith, and Judith only," returned the girl positively-"until the law
gives me a right to another name. Never will I use that of Thomas Hurter
again; nor, with my consent, shall Hetty! Hurter was not even his own name, I
find, but had he a thousand rights to it, it would give none to me. He was
not my father, thank heaven; though I may have no reason to be proud of him
that was!"

"This is strange!" said Deerslayer, looking steadily at the excited girl,
anxious to know more, but unwilling to inquire into matters that did not
properly concern him; "yes, this is very strange and oncommon! Thomas Hurter
was n't Thomas Hurter, and his darters were n't his darters! Who, then, could
Thomas Hurter be, and who are his darters?"

"Did you never hear any thing whispered against the former life of this
person, Deerslayer?" demanded Judith- "Passing, as I did, for his child, such
reports reached even me."

"I'll not deny it, Judith; no, I'll not deny it. Sartain things have been
said, as I've told you, but I'm not very credible as to reports. Young as I
am, I've lived long enough to l'am there's two sorts of characters in the
world-them that is 'arned by deeds, and them that is 'arned by tongues, and
so I prefar to see and judge for myself, instead of letting every jaw that
chooses to wag become my judgment. Hurry Harry spoke pretty plainly of the
whole family, as we journeyed this-a-way, and he did hint something
consarning Thomas Hutter's having been a free-liver on the water, in his
younger days. By free-liver, I mean that he made free to live on other men's
goods."

"He told you he was a pirate-there is no need of mincing matters between
friends. Read that, Deerslayer, and you will see that he told you no more
than the truth. This Thomas Hovey was the Thomas Hutter you knew, as is seen
by these letters."

As Judith spoke, with a flushed cheek and eyes dazzling with the brilliancy
of excitement, she held the newspaper towards her companion, pointing to the
proclamation of a Colonial Governor, already mentioned.

"Bless you, Judith!" answered the other laughing, "you might as well ask me
to print that-or, for that matter to write it. My edication has been
altogether in the woods; the only book I read, or care about reading, is the
one which God has opened afore all his creatur's in the noble forests, broad
lakes, rolling rivers, blue skies, and the winds and tempests, and sunshine,
and other glorious marvels of the land! This book I can read, and I find it
full of wisdom and knowledge."

"I crave your pardon, Deerslayer," said Judith, earnestly, more abashed than
was her wont, in finding that she had in advertently made an appeal that
might wound her compan ion's pride. "I had forgotten your manner of life, and
least of all did I wish to hurt your feelings."

"Hurt my feelin's?-Why should it hurt my feelin's to ask me to read, when I
can't read. I'm a hunter-and I may now begin to say a warrior, and no
missionary, and therefore books and papers are of no account with such as I-
No, no-Judith," and here the young man laughed cordially, "not even for wads,
seeing that your true deerkiller always uses the hide of a fa'a'n, if he's
got one, or some other bit of leather suitably prepared. There's some that do
say, all that stands in print is true, in which case I'll own an unl'arned
man must be somewhat of a loser; nevertheless, it can't be truer than that
which God has printed with his own hand, in the sky, and the woods, and the
rivers, and the springs."

"Well, then, Hutter, or Hovey, was a pirate, and being no father of mine, I
cannot wish to call him one. His name shall no longer be my name."
"If you dislike the name of that man, there's the name of your mother,
Judith. Hem may sarve you just as good a turn."

"I do not know it. I've look'd through those papers, Deer-slayer, in the hope
of finding some hint, by which I might discover who my mother was, but there
is no more trace of the past, in that respect, than the bird leaves in the
air."

"That's both oncommon, and onreasonable. Parents are bound to give their
offspring a name, even though they give 'em nothing else. Now I come of a
humble stock, though we have white gifts and a white narur', but we are not
so poorly off, as to have no name. Bumppo we are called, and I've heard it
said-" a touch of human vanity glowing on his cheek, "that the time has been
when the Bumppos had more standing and note among mankind, than they have
just now."

"They never deserved them more, Deerslayer, and the name is a good one;
either Hetty, or myself, would a thousand times rather be called Hetty
Bumppo, or Judith Bumppo, than to be called Hetty or Judith Hutter."

"That's a moral impossible," returned the hunter, good humouredly, "onless
one of you should so far demean herself as to marry me."

Judith could not refrain from smiling, when she found how simply and
naturally the conversation had come round to the very point at which she had
aimed to bring it. Although far from unfeminine or forward, either in her
feelings, or her habits, the girl was goaded by a sense of wrongs not
altogether merited, incited by the hopelessness of a future that seemed to
contain no resting place, and still more influenced by feelings that were as
novel to her, as they proved to be active and engrossing. The opening was too
good, therefore, to be neglected, though she came to the subject with much of
the indirectness and perhaps, justifiable, address of a woman.

"I do not think Hetty will ever marry, Deerslayer," she said, "and if your
name is to be borne by either of us, it must be borne by me."

"There's been handsome women too, they tell me, among the Bumppos, Judith,
afore now, and should you take up with the name, oncommon as you be, in this
particular, them that knows the family won't be altogether surprised."

"This is not talking as becomes either of us, Deerslayer, for whatever is
said on such a subject, between man and woman, should be said seriously, and
in sincerity of heart. Forgetting the shame that ought to keep girls silent,
until spoken to, in most cases, I will deal with you as frankly as I know one
of your generous nature will most like to be dealt by. Can you- do you think,
Deerslayer, that you could be happy with such a wife as a woman like myself
would make?"

"A woman like you, Judith! But where's the sense in trifling about such a
thing?-A woman like you, that is handsome enough to be a captain's lady, and
fine enough, and so far as I know edicated enough, would be little apt to
think of be coming my wife. I suppose young gals that feel themselves to be
smart, and know themselves to be handsome, find a sartain satisfaction in
passing their jokes ag'in them that's neither, like a poor Delaware hunter."

This was said good naturedly, but not without a betrayal of feeling which
showed that some thing like mortified sensibility was blended with the reply.
Nothing could have occurred more likely to awaken all Judith's generous
regrets, or to aid her in her purpose, by adding the stimulant of a
disinterested desire to atone, to her other impulses, and cloaking all under
a guise so winning and natural, as greatly to lessen the unpleasant feature
of a forwardness unbecoming the sex.

"You do me injustice if you suppose I have any such thought, or wish," she
answered, earnestly. "Never was I more serious in my life, or more willing to
abide by any agreement, that we may make to-night. I have had many suit ors,
Deerslayer-nay, scarce an unmarried trapper or hunter has been in at the Lake
these four years, who has not offered to take me away with him, and I fear
some that were married, too-"

"Ay, I'll warrant that!" interrupted the other-"I'll warrant all that! Take
'em as a body, Judith, 'arth don't hold a set of men more given to
theirselves, and less given to God and the law."

"Not one of them would I-could I listen to; happily for myself perhaps, has
it been that such was the case. There have been well looking youths among
them too, as you may have seen in your acquaintance, Henry March."

"Yes, Harry is sightly to the eye, though, to my idees, less so to the
judgment. I thought, at first, you meant to have him, Judith, I did; but
afore he went, it was easy enough to verify that the same lodge would n't be
big enough for you both."

"You have done me justice in that at least, Deerslayer. Hurry is a man I
could never marry, though he were ten times more comely to the eye, and a
hundred times more stout of heart, than he really is."

"Why not, Judith, why not? I own I'm cur'ous to know why a youth like Hurry
should n't find favor with a maiden like you?"

"Then you shall know, Deerslayer," returned the girl, gladly availing herself
of the opportunity of indirectly extol ling the qualities which had so
strongly interested her in her listener; hoping by these means covertly to
approach the subject nearest her heart. "In the first place, looks in a man
are of no importance with a woman, provided he is manly, and not disfigured,
or deformed."

"There I can't altogether agree with you," returned the other thoughtfully,
for he had a very humble opinion of his own personal appearance; "I have
noticed that the comeliest warriors commonly get the best-looking maidens of
the tribe, for wives, and the Sarpent, yonder, who is sometimes wonderful in
his paint, is a gineral favorite with all the Delaware young women, though he
takes to Hist, himself, as if she was the only beauty on 'arth!"

"It may be so with Indians; but it is different with white girls. So long as
a young man has a straight and manly frame, that promises to make him able to
protect a woman, and to keep want from the door, it is all they ask of the
figure. Giants like Hurry may do for grenadiers, but are of little account as
lovers. Then as to the face, an honest look, one that answers for the heart
within, is of more value than any shape or colour, or eyes, or teeth, or
trifles like them. The last may do for girls, but who thinks of them at all,
in a hunter, or a warrior, or a husband? -If there are women so silly, Judith
is not among them."

"Well, this is wonderful! I always thought that handsome liked handsome, as
riches love riches!"

"It may be so with you men, Deerslayer, but it is not always so with us
women. We like stout-hearted men, but we wish to see them modest; sure on a
hunt, or the war-path, ready to die for the right, and unwilling to yield to
the wrong. Above all we wish for honesty-tongues that are not used to say
what the mind does not mean, and hearts that feel a little for others, as
well as for themselves. A true-hearted girl could die for such a husband!
while the boaster, and the double-tongued suitor gets to be as hateful to the
sight, as he is to the mind."

Judith spoke bitterly, and with her usual force, but her listener was too
much struck with the novelty of the sensations he experienced to advert to
her manner. There was something so soothing to the humility of a man of his
temperament, to hear qualities that he could not but know he possessed
himself, thus highly extolled by the loveliest female he had ever beheld,
that, for the moment, his faculties seemed suspended in a natural and
excusable pride. Then it was that the idea of the possibility of such a
creature as Judith becoming his companion for life, first crossed his mind.
The image was so pleasant, and so novel, that he continued completely
absorbed by it, for more than a minute, totally regardless of the beautiful
reality that was seated before him, watching the expression of his upright
and truth-telling countenance with a keenness that gave her a very fair, if
not an absolutely accurate clue to his thoughts. Never before had so pleasing
a vision floated before the mind's eye of the young hunter, but, accustomed
most to practical things, and little addicted to submitting to the power of
his imagination, even while possessed of so much true poetical feeling in
connection with natural objects in particular, he soon recovered his reason,
and smiled at his own weakness, as the fancied picture faded from his mental
sight, and left him the simple, untaught, but highly moral being he was,
seated in the Ark of Thomas Hurter, at midnight, with the lovely countenance
of its late owner's reputed daughter, beaming on him with anxious scrutiny,
by the light of the solitary lamp.

"You're wonderful handsome, and enticing, and pleasing to look on, Judith!"
he exclaimed, in his simplicity, as fact resumed its ascendency over fancy.
"Wonderful! I do n't remember ever to have seen so beautiful a gal, even
among the Delawares; and I'm not astonished that Hurry Harry went away soured
as well as disapp'inted!"

"Would you have had me, Deerslayer, become the wife of such a man as Henry
March?"

"There's that which is in his favor, and there's that which is ag'in him. To
my taste, Hurry would n't make the best of husbands, but I fear that the
tastes of most young women, hereaway, would n't be so hard upon him."

"No-no-Judith without a name, would never consent to be called Judith March!
Any thing would be better than that."

"Judith Bumppo would n't sound as well, gal; and there's many names that
would fall short of March, in pleasing the ear."

"Ah! Deerslayer, the pleasantness of the sound, in such cases, does n't come
through the ear, but through the heart. Every thing is agreeable, when the
heart is satisfied. Were Natty Bumppo, Henry March, and Henry March, Natty
Bumppo, I might think the name of March better than it is; or were he, you, I
should fancy the name of Bumppo, horrible!"

"That's just it-yes, that's the reason of the matter. Now, I'm nat'rally
avarse to sarpents, and I hate even the word, which, the missionaries tell
me, comes from human natur', on account of a sartain sarpent at the creation
of the 'arth, that outwitted the first woman; yet, ever since Chingachgook
them! Two good hours have you been looking at them bits of papers!"

"They tell me of my parents, Deerslayer, and have settled my plans for life.
A girl may be excused who reads about her own father and mother, and that too
for the first time in her life. I am sorry to have kept you waiting."

"Never mind me, gal, never mind me. It matters little whether I sleep or
watch; but, though you be pleasant to look at, and are so handsome, Judith,
it is not altogether agreeable to sit so long to behold you shedding tears. I
know that tears do n't kill, and that some people are better for shedding a
few, now and then, especially women, but I'd rather see you smile, any time,
Judith, than see you weep."

This gallant speech was rewarded with a sweet, though a melancholy smile, and
then the girl again desired her companion to finish the examination of the
chest. The search necessarily continued some time, during which Judith
collected her thoughts, and regained her composure. She took no part in the
search, leaving every thing to the young man, looking listlessly, herself, at
the different articles that came uppermost. Nothing further of much interest,
or value, however, was found. A sword or two, such as were then worn by
gentlemen, some buckles of silver, or so richly plated as to appear silver,
and a few handsome articles of female dress composed the principal
discoveries. It struck both Judith and the Deer-slayer notwithstanding, that
some of these things might be made useful in effecting a negotiation with the
Iroquois, though the latter saw a difficulty in the way that was not so
apparent to the former. The conversation was first renewed in connection with
this point.

"And now, Deerslayer," said Judith, "we may talk of yourself, and of the
means of getting you out of the hands of the Hurons. Any part, or all of what
you have seen in the chest will be cheerfully given by me and Hetty, to set
you at liberty."

"Well, that's ginerous-yes, 'tis downright free-hearted, and free-handed, and
ginerous. This is the way with women; when they take up a fri'ndship, they do
nothing by halves, but are as willing to part with their property, as if it
had no valie in their eyes. Howsever, while I thank you both, just as natur'
gives in the free air, and the forest-now, if both these men stood here, as
suitors for your feelin's, which do you think would win your favor?"

Judith's fine face flushed, for the picture that her companion had so simply
drawn of a gay officer of the garrisons had once been particularly grateful
to her imagination, though experience and disappointment had not only chilled
all her affections, but given them a backward current, and the passing image
had a momentary influence on her feelings; but the mounting colour was
succeeded by a paleness so deadly, as to make her appear ghastly.

"As God is my judge," the girl solemnly answered, "did both these men stand
before me, as I may say one of them does, my choice, if I know my own heart,
would be the latter. I have no wish for a husband who is any way better than
myself."

"This is pleasant to listen to, and might lead a young man in time, to forget
his own onworthiness, Judith! Howsever, you hardly think all that you say. A
man like me is too rude and ignorant for one that has had such a mother to
teach her. Vanity is nat'ral, I do believe, but vanity like that, would
surpass reason."

"Then you do not know of what a woman's heart is capable! Rude you are not,
Deerslayer, nor can one be called ignorant that has studied what is before
his eyes as closely as you have done. When the affections are concerned, all
things appear in their pleasantest colors, and trifles are overlooked, or are
forgotten. When the heart feels sunshine, nothing is gloomy, even dull
looking objects, seeming gay and bright, and so it would be between you and
the woman who should love you, even though your wife might happen, in some
matters, to possess what the world calls the advantage over you."

"Judith, you come of people altogether above mine, in the world, and onequal
matches, like onequal fri'ndships can't often tarminate kindly. I speak of
this matter altogether as a fanciful thing, since it's not very likely that
you, at least, would be apt to treat it as a matter that can ever come to
pass."

Judith fastened her deep blue eyes on the open, frank countenance of her
companion, as if she would read his soul. Nothing there betrayed any covert
meaning, and she was obliged to admit to herself, that he regarded the
conversation as argumentative, rather than positive, and that he was still
without any active suspicion that her feelings were seriously involved in the
issue. At first, she felt offended; then she saw the injustice of making the
self-abasement and modesty of the hunter a charge against him, and this novel
difficulty gave a piquancy to the state of affairs that rather increased her
interest in the young man. At that critical instant, a change of plan flashed
on her mind, and with a readiness of invention that is peculiar to the quick-
witted and ingenious, she adopted a scheme by which she hoped effectually to
bind him to her person. This scheme partook equally of her fertility of
invention, and of the decision and boldness of her character. That the
conversation might not terminate too abruptly, however, or any suspicion of
her design exist, she answered the last remark of Deerslayer, as earnestly
and as truly, as if her original intention remained unaltered.

"I, certainly, have no reason to boast of parentage, after what I have seen
this night," said the girl, in a saddened voice. "I had a mother, it is true;
but of her name even, I am ignorant-and, as for my father, it is better,
perhaps, that I should never know who he was, lest I speak too bitterly of
him!"

"Judith," said Deerslayer, taking her hand kindly, and with a manly sincerity
that went directly to the girl's heart, "tis better to say no more to-night.
Sleep on what you've seen and felt; in the morning things that now look
gloomy, may look more che'rful. Above all, never do any thing in bitterness,
or because you feel as if you'd like to take revenge on yourself, for other
people's backslidings. All that has been said, or done, atween us, this
night, is your secret, and shall never be talked of by me, even with the
Sarpent, and you may be sartain if he can't get it out of me no man can. If
your parents have been faulty, let the darter be less so; remember that
you're young, and the youthful may always hope for better times; that you're
more quick-witted than usual, and such gin'rally get the better of
difficulties, and that, as for beauty, you're oncommon, which is an advantage
with all. It is time to get a little rest, for to-morrow is like to prove a
trying day to some of us."

Deerslayer arose as he spoke, and Judith had no choice but to comply. The
chest was closed and secured, and they parted in silence, she to take her
place by the side of Hist and Hetty, and he to seek a blanket on the floor of
the cabin he was in. It was not five minutes crc the young man was in a deep
sleep, but the girl continued awake for a long time. She scarce knew whether
to lament, or to rejoice, at having failed in making herself understood. On
the one hand, were her womanly sensibilities spared; on the other was the
disappointment of defeated, or at least of delayed expectations, and the
uncertainty of a future that looked so dark. Then came the new resolution,
and the bold project for the morrow, and when drowsiness finally shut her
eyes, they closed on a scene of success and happiness, that was pictured by
the fancy, under the influence of a sanguine temperament, and a happy
invention.




Chapter XXV

"But, mother, now a shade has past,
Athwart my brightest visions here,
A cloud of darkest gloom has wrapt,
The remnant of my brief career!
No song, no echo can I win,
The sparkling fount has died within."
Margaret Davidson, "To my Mother," 11. 7-12.




Hist and Hetty arose with the return of light, leaving Judith still buried in
sleep. It took but a minute for the first to complete her toilet. Her long
coal-black hair was soon adjusted in a simple knot, the calico dress belted
tight to her slender waist, and her little feet concealed in their gaudily
ornamented moccasins. When attired, she left her companion employed in
household affairs, and went herself on the platform to breathe the pure air
of the morning. Here she found Chingachgook studying the shores of the lake,
the mountains and the heavens, with the sagacity of a man of the woods, and
the gravity of an Indian.

The meeting between the two lovers was simple, but affectionate. The chief
showed a manly kindness, equally removed from boyish weakness and haste,
while the girl betrayed, in her smile and half averted looks, the bashful
tenderness of her sex. Neither spoke, unless it were with the eyes, though
each understood the other as fully as if a vocabulary of words and
protestations had been poured out. Hist seldom appeared to more advantage,
than at that moment, for just from her rest and ablutions, there was a
freshness about her youthful form and face, that the toils of the wood do not
always permit to be exhibited, by even the juvenile and pretty. Then Judith
had not only imparted some of her own skill in the toilet, during their short
intercourse, but she had actually bestowed a few well selected ornaments from
her own stores, that contributed not a little to set off the natural graces
of the Indian maid. All this the lover saw and felt, and for a moment his
countenance was illuminated with a look of pleasure, but it soon grew.

"The Great Spirit may soften their hearts, and not suffer them to be so
bloody minded. I have lived among the Hurons, and know them. They have
hearts, and will not forget their own children, should they fall into the
hands of the Delawares."

"A wolf is forever howling; a hog will always eat. They have lost warriors;
even their women will call out for vengeance. The pale face has the eyes of
an eagle, and can see into a Mingo's heart; he looks for no mercy. There is a
cloud over his spirit, though it is not before his face."

A long, thoughtful pause succeeded, during which Hist stealthily took the
hand of the chief, as if seeking his support, though she scarce ventured to
raise her eyes to a countenance that was now literally becoming terrible,
under the conflicting passions, and stern resolution that were struggling in
the breast of its owner.

"What will the Son of Uncas do?" the girl at length timidly asked. "He is a
chief, and is already celebrated in council, though so young; what does his
heart tell him is wisest; does the head, too, speak the same words as the
heart?"

"What does Wah-ta!-Wah say, at a moment when my dearest friend is in such
danger. The smallest birds sing the sweetest; it is always pleasant, to
hearken to their songs. I wish I could hear the Wren of the Woods in my
difficulty; its note would reach deeper than the ear.

Again Hist experienced the profound gratification that the language of praise
can always awaken, when uttered by those we love. The 'Honeysuckle of the
Hills' was a term often applied to the girl, by the young men of the
Delawares, though it never sounded so sweet in her ears, as from the lips of
Chingachgook; but the latter alone had ever styled her the Wren of the Woods.
With him, however, it had got to be a familiar phrase, and it was past
expression pleasant to the listener, since it conveyed to her mind the idea
that her advice and sentiments were as acceptable to her future husband, as
the tones of her voice and modes of conveying them were agreeable; uniting
the two things most prized by an Indian girl, as coming from her betrothed,
admiration for a valued physical advantage, with respect for her opinion. She
pressed the hand she held, between both her own, and answered-

"The pale-faces know every thing," he said; "can they tell us why the sun
hides his face, when he goes back, at night."

"Ay, that is downright red-skin l'arnin'," returned the other, laughing,
though he was not altogether insensible to the pleasure of proving the
superiority of his race, by solving the difficulty, which he set about doing,
in his own peculiar manner. "Harkee, Sarpent," he continued more gravely,
though too simply for affectation; "this is easierly explained than an Indian
brain may fancy. The sun, while he seem's to keep travelling in the heavens,
never budges, but it is the 'arth that turns round, and any one can
understand, if he is placed on the side of a mill-wheel, for instance, when
it's in motion, that he must some times see the heavens, while he is at other
times under water. There's no great secret in that; but plain natur'; the
difficulty being in setting the 'arth in motion."

"How does my brother know that the earth turns round?" demanded the Indian.
"Can he see it?"

"Well, that's been a puzzler, I will own, Delaware, for I've often tried, but
never could fairly make it out. Sometimes I've consaited that I could; and
then ag'in, I've been obliged to own it an onpossibility. Howsever, turn it
does, as all my people say, and you ought to believe 'em, since they can
foretel eclipses, and other prodigies, that used to fill the tribes with
terror, according to your own traditions of such things."

"Good. This is true; no red-man will deny it. When a wheel turns, my eyes can
see it-they do not see the earth turn."

"Ay, that's what I call sense obstinacy! Seeing is believing, they say, and
what they can't see, some men won't in the least give credit to.
Nevertheless, chief, that isn't quite as good reason as it may at first seem.
You believe in the Great Spirit, I know, and yet, I conclude, it would puzzle
you to show where you see him!"

"Chingachgook can see Him every where-every where in good things - the Evil
Spirit in bad. Here, in the lake; there, in the forest; yonder, in the
clouds; in Hist, in the Son of Uncas, in Tamenund, in Deerslayer. The Evil
Spirit is in the Mingos. That I see; I do not see the earth turn round."

"I don't wonder they call you the Sarpent, Delaware; no, I don't! There's
always a meaning in your words, and there's

"Wah-ta!-Wah says that neither she nor the Great Serpent could ever laugh,
again, or ever sleep without dreaming of the Hurons, should the Deerslayer
die under a Mingo tomahawk, and they do nothing to save him. She would rather
go back, and start on her long path alone, than let such a dark cloud pass
before her happiness."

"Good! The husband and the wife will have but one heart; they will see with
the same eyes, and feel with the same feelings."

What further was said, need not be related here. That the conversation was of
Deerslayer, and his hopes, has been seen already, but the decision that was
come to, will better appear in the course of the narrative. The youthful pair
were yet conversing when the sun appeared above the tops of the pines, and
the light of a brilliant American day streamed down into the valley, bathing
"in deep joy" the lake, the forests and the mountain sides. Just at this
instant Deerslayer came out of the cabin of the Ark, and stepped upon the
platform. His first look was at the cloudless heavens, then his rapid glance
took in the entire panorama of land and water, when he had leisure for a
friendly nod at his friends, and a cheerful smile for Hist.

"Well," he said, in his usual, composed manner, and pleasant voice, "he that
sees the sun set in the west, and wakes 'arly enough in the morning will be
sartain to find him coming back ag'in in the east, like a buck that is hunted
round his ha'nt. I dare say, now, Hist, you've beheld this, time and ag'in,
and yet it never entered into your galish mind to ask the reason?"

Both Chingachgook and his betrothed looked up at the luminary, with an air
that betokened sudden wonder, and then they gazed at each other, as if to
seek the solution of the difficulty. Familiarity deadens the sensibilities,
even as connected with the gravest natural phenomena, and never before had
these simple beings thought of enquiring into a movement that was of daily
occurrence, however puzzling it might appear on investigation. When the
subject was thus suddenly started, it struck both alike, and at the same
instant, with some such force, as any new and brilliant proposition in the
natural sciences would strike the scholar. Chingachgook alone saw fit to
answer.

"The pale-faces know every thing," he said; "can they tell us why the sun
hides his face, when he goes back, at night."

"ay, that is downright red-skin l'arnin'" returned the other, laughing,
through he was not altogether insensible to the pleasure of proving the
superiority of his race, by solving the difficulty, which he set aout doing,
in hiw own peculiar manner. "Harkee, Sarpent," he continued more gravely,
though too simply for affectation; "this is easierly explained than an Indian
brain may fancy. The sun, while he seems to keep traveling in the heavens,
never budges, but it is the 'arth that turns roun, and any one can
understand, if he is placed on the side of a mill-whel, for instance, when
it's in motion, that he must some times see the heavens, while he is at other
times under water. There's no great secret in that; but plain natur'; the
difficulty being in setting the 'arth in motion."

"How does my brother know hat the earth turns round?" demanded the Indina.
"Can he see it?"

"Well, that's been a puzzler, I will own, Delaware, for I've often tried, but
never could fairly make it out. Sometimes I've often tried, but never could
fairly make it out. Sometimes I've consaited that I could; and then ag'in,
I've been obliged to own it an onpossibility. Howsever, turn it does, as all
my people say, and you ought to believe 'em, since they can foretell
eclipses, and other prodigies, that used to fill the tribes with terror,
according to your owntraditions of such things."

"Good. This is true; no red-man will deny it. When a wheel turns, my eyes can
see it - they do not see the earth turn."

"y, that's what I call sense obstinacy! Seeing is believing, they say, and
what they cann't see, some men won't in the least give credit to.
Neverthless, chief, that isn't quite as good reason as itmayat first seem.
You believe in the Great Sppirit, I know, and yet, I conclude, it would
puzzle you to show you where you see him!"

"Chingachgook can see Him every where - every where in good things -the Evil
Spirit in bad. Here, in the lake; there, in the forest; yonder, in the
clounds; in Hist, in the Son of Uncas, in Tannenund, in Deerslayer. The Evil
Spirit is in the Mingos. That I see; I do not see the earth turn round."

"I so n't wonder they call you the Sarpent, Delaware; no, I do n't! There's
always a meaning in your words, and there's often a meaning in your
countenance, too! Notwithstanding, your answers does n't quite meet my idée.
ThatGod is observable in all nat'ral objects is allowable, but then he is not
perceptible in the way I mean. You know there is a Great Spirit by his works,
and the pale faces know that the 'arth turns round by its works. This is the
reason of the matter, though how it is to be explained, is more than I
exactly tell you. This I know; all my people consait that fact, and what all
the pale-faces consait, is very likely to be true."

"When the sun is in the top of that pine to-morrow, where will my brother
Deerslayer be?"

The hunter started, and he looked intently, though totally without alarm, at
his friend. Then he signed for him to follow, and led the way into the Ark,
where he mght pursue the subject unheard by those, whose feelings he feared
might get the mastery over their reason. Here he stopped, and pursued the
conversation in amore confidential tone.

"'Twas a little onreasonable in you Sarpent," he said, "to bring up such a
subject afore Hist, and when the young women of my own colour might overhear
what was said. Yes, 'twas a little more onreasonable than most things that
you do. No matter; Hist did n"t comprehind, and the other din n't hear.
Howsever, the questionis easier put than answered. No mortal can say where he
will be when the sun rises tomorrow. I will ask you the same question,
Sarpent, and should like to hear what answer you can give.

"Chingachgook will be with his friend Deerslayer - if he be in the land of
spirits, the Great Serpent will crawl at his side; if beneath yonder sun, its
warmth and light shall fall on both."

"I understand you Delaware," returned the other, touched with the simple
self-devotion of his friend, "Such language is as plain in one tongue as in
another. I comes from the heart, and goes to the heart, too. 'Tis well to
think so, and it may be well to say so, for that matter, but it would not be
well to do so, Sarpent. You are no longer alone in life, for though you have
the lodges to change, and other ceremonies to go through, afore Hist becomes
you lawful wife, yet are you as good as married, in all that bears on the
feelin's, and joy, and misery. No - no - Hist must not be desarted, because a
cloud is passing atween you and me, a little onexpectedly and a little darker
than we may have looked for."

"Hist is a daughter of the Mohicans. She knows how to obey her husband. Where
he goes, she will follow. Both will be with the Great Hunter of the
Delawares, when the sun shall be in the pine to-morrow."

"The Lord bless and protect you! - Chief; this is downright madness. Can
either, or both of you, alter a Mingo natur'. Will your grand looks, or
Hist's tears and beauty, change a wolf into a squirrel, or make a catamount
as innocent as a fa'an? No-Sarpent, you will think better of this matter, and
leave me in the hands of God. A'ter all, it's by no means sartain that the
scamps design the torments, for they may yet be pitiful, and bethink them of
the wickedness of such a course - though it is but a hopeless expectation to
look forward to a Mingo's turning aside from evil, and letting marcy get
uppermost in his heart - Nevertheless, no one knows to a sartainty what will
happen, and young creatur's, like Hist, an't to be risked on onsartainties.
This marrying is altogether a different undertaking from what some young men
fancy. Now, if you was single, or as good as single, Delaware, I should
expect you to be actyve and stirring about the camp of the vagabonds, from
sunrise to sunset, sarcumventing and contriving, as restless as a hound off
the scent, and doing all manner of things to help me, and to distract the
inimy, but two are oftener feebler than one, and we must take things as they
are, and not as we want 'em to be."

"Listen, Deerslayer," returned the Indian with an emphasis so decided as to
show how much he was in earnest. "If Chingachgook was in the hands of the
Hurons, what would my pale-face brother do? Sneak off to the Delaware
villages, and say to the chiefs, and old men, and young warriors-'see, here
is Wah-ta!-Wah; she is safe, but a little tired; and here is the Son of
Uncas, not as tired as the Honeysuckle, being stronger, but just as safe.'
Would he do this?"

"Well, that's oncommon ingen'ous; it's cunning enough for a Mingo, himself!
The Lord only knows what put it into your head to ask such a question. What
would I do?-Why, in the first place, Hist wouldn't be likely to be in my
company at all, often a meaning in your countenance, too! Notwithstanding,
your answers doesn't quite meet my idee. That God is obsarvable in al]
nat'ral objects is allowable, but then he is not parceptible in the way I
mean. You know there is a Great Spirit by his works, and the pale faces know
that the 'arth turns round by its works. This is the reason of the matter,
though how it is to be explained, is more than I can exactly tell you. This I
know; all my people consait that fact, and what all the pale-faces consait,
is very likely to be true."

"When the sun is in the top of that pine to-morrow, where will my brother
Deerslayer be?"

The hunter started, and he looked intently, though totally without alarm, at
his friend. Then he signed for him to follow, and led the way into the Ark,
where he might pursue the subject unheard by those, whose feelings he feared
might get the mastery over their reason. Here he stopped, and pursued the
conversation in a more confidential tone.

"'Twas a little onreasonable in you, Sarpent," he said, "to bring up such a
subject afore Hist, and when the young women of my own colour might overhear
what was said. Yes, 'twas a little more onreasonable than most things that
you do. No matter; Hist didn't comprehind, and the other didn't hear.
Howsever, the question is easier put than answered. No mortal can say where
he will be when the sun rises to-morrow. I will ask you the same question,
Sarpent, and should like to hear what answer you can give."

"Chingachgook will be with his friend Deerslayer- If he be in the land of
spirits, the Great Serpent will crawl at his side; if beneath yonder sun, its
warmth and light shall fall on both."

"I understand you Delaware," returned the other, touched with the simple
self-devotion of his friend. "Such language is as plain in one tongue as in
another. It comes from the heart, and goes to the heart, too. Tis well to
think so, and it may be well to say so, for that matter, but it would not be
well to do so, Sarpent. You are no longer alone in life, for though you have
the lodges to change, and other ceremonies to go through, afore Hist becomes
your lawful wife, yet are you as good as married, in all that bears on the
feelin's, and joy, and misery. No- no-Hist must not be desarted, because a
cloud is passing at for she would stay as near you as possible, and therefore
all that part about her couldn't be said, without talking nonsense. As for
her being tired, that would fall through, too, if she didn't go, and no part
of your speech would be likely to come from me; so, you see, Sarpent, reason
is ag'in you, and you may as well give it up, since to hold out ag'in reason,
is no way becoming a chief of your character and repitation."

"My brother is not himself; he forgets that he is talking to one who has sat
at the Council Fire of his nation," returned the other kindly. "When men
speak, they should say that which does not go in at one side of the head and
out at the other. Their words shouldn't be feathers, so light that a wind
which does not ruffle the water, can blow them away. He has not answered my
question; when a chief puts a question, his friend should not talk of other
things."

"I understand you, Delaware; I understand well enough what you mean, and
truth won't allow me to say otherwise. Still it's not as easy to answer as
you seem to think, for this plain reason. You wish me to say what I would do
if I had a betrothed as you have, here, on the lake, and a fri'nd yonder in
the Huron camp, in danger of the torments. That's it, isn't it?"

The Indian bowed his head silently, and always with unmoved gravity, though
his eye twinkled at the sight of the other's embarrassment.

"Well, I never had a betrothed-never had the kind of feelin's toward any
young woman, that you have towards Hist, though the Lord knows my feelin's
are kind enough towards 'em all! -still my heart, as they call it, in such
matters, isn't touched, and therefore I can't say what I would do. A fri'nd
pulls strong, that I know by exper'ence, Sarpent, but, by all that I've seen
and heard consarning love, I'm led to think that a betrothed pulls stronger."

"True; but the betrothed of Chingachgook does not pull towards the lodges of
the Delawares; she pulls towards the camp of the Hurons."

"She's a noble gal, for all her little feet, and hands that an't bigger than
a child's, and a voice that is as pleasant as a mocker's; she's a noble gal,
and like the stock of her sires! Well, what is it, Sarpent; for I conclude
she hasn't changed her mind, and means to give herself up, and turn Huron
wife. What is it you want?"

"Wah-ta!-Wah will never live in the wigwam of an Iroquois," answered the
Delaware drily. "She has little feet, but they can carry her to the villages
of her people; she has small hands, too, but her mind is large. My brother
will see what we can do, when the time shall come, rather than let him die
under Mingo torments."

"Attempt nothing heedlessly, Delaware," said the other earnestly; "I suppose
you must and will have your way; and, on the whole it's right you should, for
you'd neither be happy, unless something was undertaken. But attempt nothing
heedlessly-I didn't expect you'd quit the lake, while my matter remained in
unsartainty, but remember, Sarpent, that no torments that Mingo ingenuity can
invent, no ta'ntings, and revilings; no burnings, and roastings and nail-
tearings, nor any other onhuman contrivances can so soon break down my
spirit, as to find that you and Hist, have fallen into th