e power of the
inimy, in striving to do something for my good."

"The Delawares are prudent. The Deerslayer will not find them running into a
strange camp, with their eyes shut."

Here the dialogue terminated. Hetty announced that the breakfast was ready,
and the whole party was soon seated around the simple board, in the usual
primitive manner of borderers. Judith was the last to take her seat, pale,
silent, and betraying in her countenance that she had passed a painful, if
not a sleepless, night. At this meal scarce a syllable was exchanged, all the
females manifesting want of appetites, though the two men were unchanged in
this particular. It was early when the party arose, and there still remained
several hours before it would be necessary for the prisoner to leave his
friends. The knowledge of this circumstance, and the interest all felt in his
welfare, induced the whole to assemble on the platform again, in the desire
to be near the expected victim, to listen to his discourse, and if possible
to show their interest in him, by anticipating his wishes. Deerslayer,
himself, so far as human eyes could penetrate, was wholly unmoved, conversing
cheerfully and naturally, though he avoided any direct allusions to the
expected and great event of the day. If any evidence could be discovered of
his thought's reverting to that painful subject at all, it was in the manner
in which he spoke of death and the last great change.

"Grieve not, Hetty," he said, for it was while consoling this simple-minded
girl for the loss of her parents that he thus betrayed his feelings, "since
God has app'inted that all must die. Your parents, or them you fancied your
parents, which is the same thing, have gone afore you; this is only in the
order of natur', my good gal, for the aged go first, and the young follow.
But one that had a mother like your'n, Hetty, can be at no loss to hope the
best, as to how matters will turn out in another world. The Delaware, here,
and Hist, believe in happy hunting grounds, and have idees befitting their
notions and gifts, as red skins, but we who are of white blood hold
altogether to a different doctrine. Still, I rather conclude our heaven is
their land of spirits, and that the path which leads to it will be travelled
by all colours alike. Tis onpossible for the wicked to enter on it, I will
allow, but fri'nds can scarce be separated, though they are not of the same
race on 'arth. Keep up your spirits, poor Hetty, and look forward to the day
when you will meet your mother ag'in, and that without pain, or sorrowing."

"I do expect to see mother," returned the truth-telling and simple girl, "but
what will become of father?"

"That's a non-plusser, Delaware," said the hunter, in the Indian dialect-
"yes, that is a down-right non-plusser! The Muskrat was not a saint on 'arth,
and it's fair to guess he'll not be much of one, here after! Howsever,
Hetty," dropping into the English by an easy transition, "howsever, Hetty, we
must all hope for the best. That is wisest, and it is much the easiest to the
mind, if one can only do it. I ricommend to you, trusting to God, and putting
down all misgivings and fainthearted feelin's. It's wonderful, Judith, how
different people have different notions about the futur', some fancying one
change, and some fancying another. I've known white teachers that have
thought all was spirit, hereafter, and them, ag'in, that believed the body
will be transported to another world, much as the red-skins themselves
imagine, and that we shall walk about, in the flesh, and know each other, and
talk together, and be fri'nds there, as we've been fri'nds here."

"Which of these opinions is most pleasing to you, Deerslayer?" asked the
girl, willing to indulge his melancholy mood, and far from being free from
its influence herself. "Would it be disagreeable to think that you should
meet all
who are now on this platform in another world? Or have you known enough of us
here, to be glad to see us no more.

"The last would make death a bitter portion; yes it would. It's eight good
years since the Sarpent and I began to hunt together, and the thought that we
were never to meet ag'in, would be a hard thought to me. He looks forward to
the time when he shall chase a sort of spirit-deer, in company, on plains
where there's no thorns, or brambles, or marshes, or other hardships to
overcome, whereas I can't fall into all these notions, seeing that they
appear to be ag'in reason. Spirits can't eat, nor have they any use for
clothes, and deer can only rightfully be chased to be slain, or slain, unless
it be for the venison, or the hides. Now, I find it hard to suppose that
blessed spirits can be put to chasing game, without an object, tormenting the
dumb animals just for the pleasure and agreeableness of their own amusements.
I never, yet, pulled a trigger on buck or doe, Judith, unless when food or
clothes was wanting."

"The recollection of which, Deerslayer, must now be a great consolation to
you.
"It is the thought of such things, my fri'nds, that enables a man to keep his
furlough. It might be done without it, I own; for the worst red skins,
sometimes do their duty in this matter; but it makes that which might
otherwise be hard, easy, if not altogether to our liking. Nothing truly makes
a bolder heart, than a light conscience."

Judith turned paler than ever, but she struggled for self-command, and
succeeded in obtaining it. The conflict had been severe, however, and it left
her so little disposed to speak, that Hetty pursued the subject. This was
done in the simple manner natural to the girl.

"It would be cruel to kill the poor deer," she said, "in this world, or any
other, when you don't want their venison, or their skins. No good white-man,
and no good red man would do it. But it's wicked for a christian to talk
about chasing any thing in heaven. Such things are not done before the face
of God, and the missionary that teaches these doctrines, can't be a true
missionary. He must be a wolf in sheep's clothing. I suppose you know what a
sheep is, Deerslayer."

"That I do, gal, and a useful creatur' it is, to such as like cloths better
than skins, for winter garments. I understand the natur' of sheep, though
I've had but little to do with 'em, and the natur' of wolves too, and can
take the idee of a wolf in the fleece of a sheep, though I think it would be
like to prove a hot jacket for such a beast, in the warm months!"

"And sin, and hypocrisy are hot jackets, as they will find, who put them on,"
returned Hetty, positively, "so the wolf would be no worse off than the
sinner. Spirits don't hunt, nor trap, nor fish, nor do any thing that vain
men undertake, since they've none of the longings of this world to feed. Oh!
Mother told me all that, years ago, and I don't wish to hear it denied."

"Well, my good Hetty, in that case you'd better not broach your doctrine to
Hist, when she and you are alone, and the young Delaware maiden is inclined
to talk religion. It's her fixed idee, I know, that the good warriors do
nothing but hunt, and fish in the other world, though I don't believe that
she fancies any of them are brought down to trapping, which is no empl'yment
for a brave. But of hunting and fishing, accordin' to her notion, they've
their fill, and that, too, over the most agreeablest hunting grounds, and
among game that is never out of season, and which is just actyve and
instinctyve enough to give a pleasure to death. So I wouldn't ricommend it to
you to start Hist on that idee."

"Hist can't be so wicked as to believe any such thing," returned the other,
earnestly. "No Indian hunts after he is dead."

"No wicked Indian, I grant you; no wicked Indian, sartainly. He is obliged to
carry the ammunition, and to look on without sharing in the sport, and to
cook, and to light the fires, and to do every thing that isn't manful. Now,
mind; I don't tell you these are my idees, but they are Hist's idees, and,
therefore, for the sake of peace the less you say to her ag'in 'em, the
better."

"And what are your ideas of the fate of an Indian, in the other world?"
demanded Judith, who had just found her voice.

"Ah! gal, any thing but that! I am too christianized to expect any thing so
fanciful, as hunting and fishing after death, nor do I believe there is one
Manitou for the red skin and another for a pale face. You find different
colours on 'arth, as any one may see, but you don't find different natur's.
Different gifts, but only one natur'."

"In what is a gift different from a nature? Is not nature itself a gift from
God?"

"Sartain; that's quick-thoughted, and creditable, Judith, though the main
idee is wrong. A natur' is the creatur' itself; its wishes, wants, idees and
feelin's, as all are born in him. This natur' never can be changed, in the
main, though it may undergo some increase, or lessening. Now, gifts come of
sarcumstances. Thus, if you put a man in a town, he gets town gifts; in a
settlement, settlement gifts; in a forest, gifts of the woods. A soldier has
soldierly gifts, and a missionary preaching gifts. All these increase and
strengthen, until they get to fortify natur', as it might be, and excuse a
thousand acts and idees. Still the creatur' is the same at the bottom; just
as a man who is clad in regimentals is the same as the man that is clad in
skins. The garments make a change to the eye, and some change in the conduct,
perhaps; but none in the man. Herein lies the apology for gifts; seein' that
you expect different conduct from one in silks and satins, from one in
homespun; though the Lord, who didn't make the dresses, but who made the
creatur's themselves, looks only at his own work. This isn't ra'al missionary
doctrine, but it's as near it, as a man of white colour need be. Ah's! me;
little did I think to be talking of such matters, to-day, but it's one of our
weaknesses never to know what will come to pass. Step into the Ark with me,
Judith, for a minute; I wish to convarse with you."

Judith complied with a willingness she could scarce conceal. Following the
hunter into the cabin, she took a seat on a stool, while the young man
brought Killdeer, the rifle she had given him, out of a corner, and placed
himself on another, with the weapon laid upon his knees. After turning the
piece round and round, and examining its lock and its breech with a sort of
affectionate assiduity, he laid it down and proceeded to the subject which
had induced him to desire the interview.

"I understand you, Judith, to say that you gave me this rifle," he said. "I
agreed to take it, because a young woman can have no particular use for fire-
arms. The we'pon has a great name, and it desarves it, and ought of right to
be carried by some known and sure hand, for the best repitation may be lost
by careless and thoughtless handling."

'Can it be in better hands than those in which it is now, Deerslayer. Thomas
Hutter seldom missed with it; with you it must turn out to be-"

"Sartain death!" interrupted the hunter, laughing. "I once know'd a beaver-
man that had a piece he called by that very name, but 'twas all boastfulness,
for I've seen Delawares that were as true with arrows, at a short range.
Howsever, I'll not deny my gifts-for this is a gift, Judith, and not natur'-
but, I'll not deny my gifts, and therefore allow that the rifle couldn't well
be in better hands than it is at present. But, how long will it be likely to
remain there? Atween us, the truth may be said, though I shouldn't like to
have it known to the Sarpent and Hist; but, to you the truth may be spoken,
since your feelin's will not be as likely to be tormented by it, as those of
them that have known me longer and better. How long am I like to own this
rifle or any other? That is a serious question for our thoughts to rest on,
and should that happen which is so likely to happen, Killdeer would be
without an owner."

Judith listened with apparent composure, though the conflict within came near
overpowering her. Appreciating the singular character of her companion,
however, she succeeded in appearing calm, though, had not his attention been
drawn exclusively to the rifle, a man of his keenness of observation could
scarce have failed to detect the agony of mind with which the girl had
hearkened to his words. Her great self-command, notwithstanding, enabled her
to pursue the subject in a way still to deceive him.

"What would you have me do with the weapon," she asked- "should that which
you seem to expect, take place?"

"That's just what I wanted to speak to you about, Judith; that's just it.
There's Chingachgook, now, though far from being parfect sartainty, with a
rifle-for few red skins ever get to be that- though far from being parfect
sartainty, he is respectable, and is coming on. Nevertheless, he is my
fri'nd, and all the better fri'nd, perhaps, because there never can be any
hard feelin's atween us, touchin' our gifts, his'n hein' red, and mine bein'
altogether white. Now, I should like to leave Killdeer to the Sarpent, should
any thing happen to keep me from doing credit and honor to your precious
gift, Judith."

"Leave it to whom you please, Deerslayer. The rifle is your own, to do with
as you please. Chingachgook shall have it, should you never return to claim
it, if that he your wish."

"Has Hetty been consulted in this matter?-Property goes from the parent to
the children, and not to one child, in partic'lar!"

"If you place your right on that of the law, Deerslayer, I fear none of us
can claim to be the owner. Thomas Hutter was no more the father of Esther,
than he was the father of Judith. Judith and Esther we are truly, having no
other name!"

"There may be law in that, but there's no great reason, gal. Accordin' to the
custom of families, the goods are your'n, and there's no one here to gainsay
it. If Hetty would only say that she is willing, my mind would be quite at
ease in the matter. It's true, Judith, that your sister has neither your
beauty, nor your wit; hut we should he the tenderest of the rights and
welfare of the most weak-minded."

The girl made no answer but placing herself at a window, she summoned her
sister to her side. When the question was put to Hetty, that simple-minded
and affectionate creature cheerfully assented to the proposal to confer on
Deerslayer a full right of ownership to the much-coveted rifle. The latter
now seemed perfectly happy, for the time being at least, and after again
examining and re-examining his prize, he expressed a determination to put its
merits to a practical test, before he left the spot. No boy could have been
more eager to exhibit the qualities of his trumpet, or his cross-how, than
this simple forester was to prove those of his rifle. Returning to the
platform, he first took the Delaware aside, and informed him that this
celebrated piece was to become his property, in the event of any thing
serious befalling himself.

"This is a new reason why you should he wary, Sarpent, and not run into any
oncalculated danger," the hunter added, "for, it will he a victory of itself,
to a tribe to own such a piece as this! The Mingos will turn green with envy,
and, what is more, they will not ventur' heedlessly near a village where it
is known to he kept. So, look well to it, Delaware, and remember that you've
now to watch over a thing that has all the valie of a creatur', without its
failin's. Hist may he, and should he precious to you, hut Killdeer will have
the love and veneration of your whole people."

"One rifle like another, Deerslayer," returned the Indian, in English, the
language used by the other, a little hurt at his friend's lowering his
betrothed to the level of a gun. "All kill; all wood and iron. Wife dear to
heart; rifle good to shoot."

"And what is a man in the woods without something to shoot with?-a miserable
trapper, or a forlorn broom and basket maker, at the best. Such a man may hoe
corn, and keep soul and body together, but he can never know the savory
morsels of venison, or tell a bear's ham from a hog's. Come, my fri'nd, such
another occasion may never offer ag'in, and I feel a strong craving for a
trial with this celebrated piece. You shall bring out your own rifle, and I
will just sight Killdeer in a careless way, in order that we may know a few
of its secret vartues."

As this proposition served to relieve the thoughts of the whole party, by
giving them a new direction, while it was likely to produce no unpleasant
results, every one was willing to enter into it; the girls bringing forth the
fire-arms with an alacrity, bordering on cheerfulness. Hutter's armory was
well supplied, possessing several rifles, all of which were habitually kept
loaded, in readiness to meet any sudden demand for their use. On the present
occasion, it only remained to freshen the primings, and each piece was in a
state for service. This was soon done, as all assisted in it, the females
being as expert in this part of the system of defence, as their male
companions.

"Now, Sarpent, we'll begin in a humble way, using Old Tom's commoners first,
and coming t6 your we'pon and Killdeer as the winding up observations," said
Deerslayer, delighted to he again, weapon in hand, ready to display his
skill. "Here's birds in abundance, some in, and some over the lake, and they
keep at just a good range, hovering round the hut. Speak your mind, Delaware,
and p'int out the creatur' you wish to alarm. Here's a diver nearest in, off
to the eastward, and that's a creatur' that buries itself at the flash, and
will he like enough to try both piece and powder."

Chingachgook was a man of few words. No sooner was the bird pointed out to
him, than he took his aim and fired. The duck dove at the flash, as had been
expected, and the bullet skipped harmlessly along the surface of the lake,
first striking the water within a few inches of the spot where the bird had
so lately swam. Deerslayer laughed, cordially and naturally, hut, at the same
time, he threw himself into an attitude of preparation, and stood keenly
watching the sheet of placid water. Presently a dark spot appeared, and then
the duck arose to breathe, and shook its wings. While in this act, a bullet
passed directly through its breast, actually turning it over lifeless, on its
hack. At the next moment, Deerslayer stood with the breech of his rifle on
the platform, as tranquil as if nothing had happened, though laughing in his
own peculiar manner.

"There's no great trial of the pieces in that!" he said, as if anxious to
prevent a false impression of his own merir. "No, that proof's neither for,
nor ag'in the rifles, seeing it was all quickness of hand and eye. I took the
bird at a disadvantage, or he might have got under, again, afore the bullet
reached him. But the Sarpent is too wise to mind such tricks, having long
been used to them. Do you remember the time, chief, when you thought yourself
sartain of the wild-goose, and I took him out of your very eyes, as it might
be with a little smoke! Howsever, such things pass for nothing. atween
fri'nds, and young folk will have their fun, Judith. Ay; here's just the bird
we want, for it's as good for the fire, as it is for the aim, and nothing
should be lost that can be turned to just account. There, further north,
Delaware."

The latter looked in the required direction, and he soon saw a large black
duck floating in stately repose on the water. At that distant day, when so
few men were present to derange the harmony of the wilderness, all the
smaller lakes with which the interior of New York so abounds, were places of
resort for the migratory aquatic birds, and this sheet like the others had
once been much frequented by all the varieties of the duck, by the goose, the
gull, and the loon. On the appearance of Hutter, the spot was comparatively
deserted for other sheets, more retired and remote, though some of each
species continued to resort thither, as indeed they do to the present hour.
At that instant, a hundred birds were visible from the castle, sleeping on
the water, or laying their feathers in the limpid element, though no other
offered so favorable a mark as that Deerslayer had just pointed out to his
friend. Chingachgook as usual, spared his words, and proceeded to execution.
This time his aim was more careful than before, and his success in
proportion. The bird had a wing crippled, and fluttered along the water
screaming, materially increasing its distance from its enemies.

"That bird must be put out of pain," exclaimed Deerslayer, the moment the
animal endeavored to rise on the wing, "and this is the rifle and the eye to
do it."
The duck was still floundering along, when the fatal bullet overtook it,
severing the head from the neck as neatly as if it had been done with an axe.
Hist had indulged in a low cry of delight at the success of the young Indian,
but now she affected to frown and resent the greater skill of his friend. The
chief, on the contrary, uttered the usual exclamation of pleasure, and his
smile proved how much he admired, and how little he envied.

"Never mind the gal, Sarpent, never mind Hist's feelin's, which will neither
choke, nor drown, slay nor beautify," said Deerslayer, laughing. "'Tis
nat'ral for women to enter into their hushand's victories and defeats, and
you are as good as man and wife, so far as prejudyce and fri'ndship go. Here
is a hird over head that will put the pieces, to the proof. I challenge you
to an upward aim, with a flying target. That's a ra'al proof, and one that
needs sartain rifles, as well as sartain eyes."

The species of eagle that frequents the water, and lives on fish, was also
present, and one was hovering at a considerable height above the hut,
greedily watching for an opportunity to make a swoop; its hungry young
elevating their heads from a nest that was in sight, in the naked summit of a
dead pine. Chingachgook silently turned a new piece against this bird, and
after carefully watching his time, fired. A wider circuit than common,
denoted that the messenger had passed through the air, at no great distance
from the bird though it missed its object. Deerslayer, whose aim was not more
true than it was quick, fired as soon as it was certain his friend had
missed, and the deep swoop that followed left it momentarily doubtful whether
the eagle was hit or not. The marksman himself, however, proclaimed his own
want of success, calling on his friend to seize another rifle, for he saw
signs on the part of the bird of an intention to quit the spot.

"I made him wink, Sarpent, I do think his feathers were ruffled, but no blood
has yet been drawn, nor is that old piece fit for so nice and quick a sight.
Quick, Delaware, you've now a better rifle, and, Judith, bring out Killdeer,
for this is the occasion to try his merits, if he has 'em."

A general movement followed, each of the competitors got ready, and the girls
stood in eager expectation of the result. The eagle had made a wide circuit
after his low swoop, and fanning his way upward, once more hovered nearly
over the hut, at a distance even greater than before. Chingachgook gazed at
him, and then expressed his opinion of the impossibility of striking a bird
at that great height, and while he was so nearly perpendicular, as to the
range. But a low murmur from Hist, produced a sudden impulse and he fired.
The result showed how well he had calculated, the eagle not even varying his
flight, sailing round and round in his airy circle, and looking down, as if
in contempt, at his foes.

"Now, Judith," cried Deerslayer, laughing, with glistening and delighted
eyes, "we'll see if Killdeer isn't Killeagle, too! Give me room Sarpent, and
watch the reason of the aim, for by reason any thing may be l'arned."

A careful sight followed, and was repeated again and again, the bird
continuing to rise higher and higher. Then followed the flash and the report.
The swift messenger sped upward, and, at the next instant, the bird turned on
its side, and came swooping down, now struggling with one wing and then with
the other, sometimes whirling in a circuit, next fanning desperately as if
conscious of its injury, until, having described several complete circles
around the spot, it fell heavily into the end of the Ark. On examining the
body, it was found that the bullet had pierced it about half way between one
of its wings and the breast-bone.






Chapter XXVI.

"Upon two stony tables, spread before her,
She lean'd her bosom, more than stony hard,
There slept th' impartial judge, and strict restorer
Of wrong, or right, with pain or with reward;
There hung the score of all our debts, the card
Where good, and bad, and life, and death, were painted;
Was never heart of mortal so untainted,
But when the roll was read, with thousand terrors fainted."

Giles Fletcher, Christ's Victory in Heaven, lxv.



We've done an unthoughtful thing, Sarpent-yes, Judith, we've done an
unthoughtful thing in taking life with an object no better than vanity!"
exclaimed Deerslayer, when the Delaware held up the enormous bird, by its
wings, and exhibited the dying eyes riveted on its enemies with the gaze that
the helpless ever fasten on their destroyers. "Twas more becomin' two boys to
gratify their feelin's, in this onthoughtful manner, than two warriors on a
war path, even though it be their first. Ah's! me; well, as a punishment I'll
quit you at once, and when I find myself alone with them bloody-minded
Mingos, it's more than like I'll have occasion to remember that life is
sweet, even to the beasts of the woods and the fowls of the air. There,
Judith; there's Kildeer; take him back, ag'in, and keep him for some hand
that's more desarving to own such a piece."

"I know of none as deserving as your own, Deerslayer," answered the girl in
haste; "none but yours shall keep the rifle."

"If it depended on skill, you might be right enough, gal, but we should know
when to use fire-arms, as well as how to use 'em. I have n't l'arnt the first
duty yet, it seems; so keep the piece till I have. The sight of a dyin' and
distressed creatur', even though it be only a bird, brings wholesome thoughts
to a man who don't know how soon his own time may come, and who is pretty
sartain that it will come afore the sun sets; I'd give back all my vain
feelin's, and rej'icin's in hand and eye, if that poor eagle was only on its
nest ag'in, with its young, praisin' the Lord, for any thing that we can know
about the matter, for health and strength!"

The listeners were confounded with this proof of sudden repentance in the
hunter, and that too for an indulgence so very common, that men seldom stop
to weigh its consequences, or the physical suffering it may bring on the
unoffending and helpless. The Delaware understood what was said, though he
scarce understood the feelings which had prompted the words, and by way of
disposing of the difficulty, he drew his keen knife, and severed the head of
the sufferer from its body.

"What a thing is power!" continued the hunter, 'and what a thing it is, to
have it, and not to know how to use it. It's no wonder, Judith, that the
great so often fail of their duties, when even the little and the humble find
it so hard to do what's right, and not to do what's wrong. Then, how one evil
act brings others a'ter it! Now, wasn't it for this furlough of mine, which
must soon take me back to the Mingos, I'd find this creatur's nest, if I
travelled the woods a forthnight- though an eagle's nest is soon found by
them that understands the bird's natur', - but I'd travel a fortnight rather
than not find it, just to put the young, too, out of their pain."

"I'm glad to hear you say this, Deerslayer," observed Hetty, "and God will be
more apt to remember your sorrow for what you've done, than the wickedness
itself. I thought how wicked it was to kill harmless birds, while you were
shooting, and meant to tell you so; but, I do n'm know how it happened, - I
was so curious to see if you could hit an eagle at so great a height, that I
forgot altogether to speak, 'till the mischief was done."

"That's it; that's just it, my good Hetty. We can all see our faults and
mistakes when it's too late to help them! Howsever I'm glad you did n't
speak, for I do n't think a word or two would have stopped me, just at that
moment, and so the sin stands in its nakedness, and not aggravated by any
unheeded calls to forbear. Well, well, bitter thoughts are hard to be borne
at all times, hut there's times when they're harder than at others."

Little did Deerslayer know, while thus indulging in feelings that were
natural to the man, and so strictly in accordance with his own
unsophisticated and just principles, that, in the course of the inscrutable
providence, which so uniformly and yet so mysteriously covers all events with
its mantle, the very fault he was disposed so severely to censure, was to be
made the means of determining his own earthly fate. The mode and the moment
in which he was to feel the influence of this interference, it would be
premature to relate, but both will appear in the course of the succeeding
chapters. As for the young man, he now slowly left the Ark, like one
sorrowing for his misdeeds, and seated himself in silence on the platform. By
this time the sun had ascended to some height, and its appearance, taken in
connection with his present feelings, induced him to prepare to depart. The
Delaware got the canoe ready for his friend, as soon as apprised of his
intention, while Hist busied herself in making the few arrangements that were
thought necessary to his comfort. All this was done without ostentation, but
in a way that left Deerslayer fully acquainted with, and equally disposed to
appreciate, the motive. When all was ready, both returned to the side of
Judith and Hetty, neither of whom had moved from the spot where the young
hunter sat.

'The best fri'nds must often part," the last began, when he saw the whole
party grouped around him-"yes, fri'ndship can't alter the ways of Providence,
and let our feelin's be as they may, we must part. I've often thought there's
moments when our words dwell longer on the mind than common, and when advice
is remembered, just because the mouth that gives it, is n't likely to give it
ag'in. No one knows what will happen in this world, and therefore it may be
well, when fri'nds separate under a likelihood that the parting may be long,
to say a few words in kindness, as a sort of keepsakes. If all but one will
go into the Ark, I'll talk to each in turn, and what is more, I'll listen to
what you may have to say back ag'in, for it's a poor counsellor that won't
take as well as give."

As the meaning of the speaker was understood, the two Indians immediately
withdrew as desired, leaving the sisters, however, still standing at the
young mans side. A look of Deerslayer's induced Judith to explain.

"You can advise Hetty as you land," she said hastily, 'for I intend that she
shall accompany you to the shore."

"Is this wise, Judith? It's true, that under common sarcumstances a feeble-
mind is a great protection among redskins, but when their feelin's are up,
and they're bent on revenge, it's hard to say what may come to pass. Besides-
-"

"What were you about to say, Deerslayer?" asked Judith, whose gentleness of
voice and manner amounted nearly to tenderness, though she struggled hard to
keep her emotions and apprehensions in subjection.

"Why, simply that there are sights and doin's that one even as little gifted
with reason and memory as Hetty here, might better not witness. So, Judith,
you would do well to let me land alone, and to keep your sister back."

"Never fear for me, Deerslayer," put in Hetty, who comprehended enough of the
discourse to know its general drift, "I'm feeble minded, and that they say is
an excuse for going any where; and what that won't excuse, will be overlooked
on account of the bible I always carry. It is wonderful, Judith, how all
sorts of men; the trappers as well as the hunters; red-men as well as white;
Mingos as well as Delawares do reverence and fear the bible!"

"I think you have not the least ground to fear any injury, Hetty," answered
the sister, 'and therefore I shall insist on your going to the Huron camp
with our friend. Your being there can do no harm, not even to yourself, and
may do great good to Deerslayer."

"This is not a moment, Judith, to dispute, and so have the matter your own
way," returned the young man. "Get yourself ready, Hetty, and go into the
canoe, for I've a few parting words to say to your sister, which can do you
no good."

Judith, and her companion, continued silent, until Hetty had so far complied,
as to leave them alone, when Deerslayer took up the subject, as if it had
been interrupted by some ordinary occurrence, and in a very matter of fact
way.

"Words spoken at parting, and which may be the last we ever hear from a
fri'nd are not soon forgotten," he repeated, "and so Judith, I intend to
speak to you like a brother, seem' I'm not old enough to be your father. In
the first place, I wish to caution you ag'in your inimies, of which two may
be said to ha'nt your very footsteps, and to beset your ways. The first is
oncommon good-looks, which is as dangerous a foe to some young women, as a
whole tribe of Mingos could prove, and which calls for great watchfulness-
not to admire and praise- but to distrust and sarcumvent. Yes, good looks may
be sarcumvented, and fairly outwitted, too. In order to do this you've only
to remember that they melt like the snows, and, when once gone, they never
come back ag'in. The seasons come and go, Judith, and if we have winter, with
storms and frosts, and spring with chills and leafless trees, we have summer
with its sun and glorious skies, and fall with its fruits, and a garment
thrown over the forest, that no beauty of the town could rummage out of all
the shops in America. 'Arth is in an etarnal round, the goodness of God,
bringing back the pleasant when we've had enough of the onpleasant. But it's
not so with good looks. They are lent for a short time in youth, to be used
and not abused, and, as I never met with a young woman to whom providence has
been as bountiful, as it has to you, Judith, in this partic'lar, I warn you,
as it might be with my dyin' breath, to beware of the inimy-fri'nd, or inimy,
as we deal with the gift."

It was so grateful to Judith to hear these unequivocal admissions of her
personal charms, that much would have been forgiven to the man, who made
them, let him be who he might. But, at that moment, and from a far better
feeling, it would not have been easy for Deerslayer seriously to offend her,
and she listened with a patience, which, had it been foretold only a week
earlier, it would have excited her indignation to hear.

'I understand your meaning, Deerslayer," returned the girl, with a meekness
and humility that a little surprised her listener, "and hope to be able to
profit by it. But, you have mentioned only one of the enemies I have to fear;
who, or what is the other."

"The other is givin' way afore your own good sense and judgment, I find,
Judith; yes, he's not as dangerous as I supposed. Howsever, havin' opened the
subject, it will be as well to end it honestly. The first inimy you have to
be watchful of, as I've already told you, Judith, is oncommon good-looks, and
the next is an oncommon knowledge of the sarcumstance. If the first is bad,
the last does n't, in any way, mend the matter, so far as safety and peace of
mind are consarned."

How much longer the young man would have gone on in his simple and
unsuspecting, but well intentioned manner, it might not be easy to say, had
he not been interrupted by his listener's bursting into tears, and giving way
to an outbreak of feeling, which was so much the more violent from the fact
that it had been with so much difficulty suppressed. At first her sobs were
so violent and uncontrollable that Deerslayer was a little appalled, and he
was abundantly repentant from the instant that he discovered how much greater
was the effect produced by his words, than he had anticipated. Even the
austere and exacting are usually appeased by the signs of contrition, but the
nature of Deerslayer did not require proofs of intense feelings so strong in
order to bring him down to a level with the regrets felt by the girl herself.
He arose, as if an adder had stung him, and the accents of the mother that
soothes her child were scarcely more gentle and winning than the tones of his
voice, as he now expressed his contrition at having gone so far.

"It was well meant, Judith," he said, "but it was not intended to hurt your
feelin's so much. I have overdone the advice, I see; yes, I've overdone it,
and I crave your pardon for the same. Fri'ndship's an awful thing! Sometimes
it chides us for not having done enough; and then, ag'in it speaks in strong
words for havin' done too much. Howsever, I acknowledge I've overdone the
matter, and as I've a ra'al and strong regard for you, I rej'ice to say it,
inasmuch as it proves how much better you are, than my own vanity and
consaits had made you out to be."

Judith now removed her hands from her face, her tears had ceased, and she
unveiled a countenance so winning with the smile which rendered it even
radiant, that the young man gazed at her, for a moment, with speechless
delight.

'Say no more, Deerslayer," she hastily interposed; "it pains me to hear you
find fault with yourself. I know my own weakness, all the better, now I see
that you have discovered it; the lesson, bitter as I have found it for a
moment, shall not be forgotten. We will not talk any longer, of these things,
for I do not feel myself brave enough for the undertaking, and I should not
like the Delaware, or Hist, or even Hetty, to notice my weakness. Farewell,
Deerslayer; may God bless and protect you as your honest heart deserves
blessings and protection, and as I must think he will."

Judith had so far regained the superiority that properly belonged to her
better education, high spirit, and surpassing personal advantages, as to
preserve the ascendancy she had thus accidentally obtained, and effectually
prevented any return to the subject that was as singularly interrupted, as it
had been singularly introduced. The young man permitted her to have every
thing her own way, and when she pressed his hard hand in both her own, he
made no resistance, but submitted to the homage as quietly, and with quite as
matter of course a manner, as a sovereign would have received a similar
tribute from a subject, or the mistress from her suitor. Feeling had flushed
the face and illuminated the whole countenance of the girl, and her beauty
was never more resplendant than when she cast a parting glance at the youth.
That glance was filled with anxiety, interest and gentle pity. At the next
instant, she darted into the hut and was seen no more, though she spoke to
Hist from a window, to inform her that their friend expected her appearance.

"You know enough of red skin natur', and red skin usages, Wah-ta!-Wah, to see
the condition I am in on account of this furlough," commenced the hunter in
Delaware, as soon as the patient and submissive girl of that people had moved
quietly to his side; "you will therefore best onderstand how onlikely I am
ever to talk with you ag'in. I've but little to say; but that little comes
from long livin' among your people, and from havin' obsarved and noted their
usages. The life of a woman is hard at the best, but I must own, though I'm
not opinionated in favor of my own colour, that it is harder among the red
men than it is among the pale faces. This is a p'int on which christians may
well boast, if boasting can be set down for christianity in any manner or
form, which I rather think it cannot. Howsever, all women have their trials.
Red women have their'n in what I should call the nat'ral way, while white
women take 'em innoculated like. Bear your burthen, Hist, becomingly, and
remember if it be a little toilsome, how much lighter it is than that of most
Indian women. I know the Sarpent well - what I call cordially - and he will
never be a tyrant to any thing he loves, though he will expect to be treated
himself like a Mohican Chief. There will be cloudy days in your lodge I
suppose, for they happen under all usages, and among all people, but, by
keepin' the windows of the heart open there will always be room for the sun-
shine to enter. You come of a great stock yourself, and so does Chingachgook.
It's not very likely that either will ever forget the sarcumstance and do any
thing to disgrace your forefathers. Nevertheless, likin' is a tender plant,
and never thrives long when watered with tears. Let the 'arth around your
married happiness be moistened by the dews of kindness."

"My pale brother is very wise; Wah will keep in her mind all that his wisdom
tells her."

"That's judicious and womanly, Hist. Care in listening, and stout-heartedness
in holding to good counsel, is a wife's great protection. And, now, ask the
Sarpent to come and speak with me, for a moment, and carry away with you all
my best wishes and prayers. I shall think of you Hist, and of your intended
husband, let what may come to pass, and always wish you well, here and
hereafter, whether the last is to be according to Indian idees, or christian
doctrines."

Hist shed no tear at parting. She was sustained by the high resolution of one
who had decided on her course, but her dark eyes were luminous with the
feelings that glowed within, and her pretty countenance beamed with an
expression of determination that was in marked and singular contrast to its
ordinary gentleness. It was but a minute ere the Delaware advanced to the
side of his friend with the light, noiseless tread of an Indian.

"Come, this-a-way, Sarpent, here more out of sight of the women," commenced
the Deerslayer, "for I've several things to say that must n't so much as be
suspected, much less overheard. You know too well the natur' of furloughs and
Mingos to have any doubts or misgivin's consarnin' what is like to happen,
when I get back to the camp. On them two p'ints therefore, a few words will
go a great way. In the first place, chief, I wish to say a little about Hist,
and the manner in which you red men treat your wives. I suppose it's
accordin' to the gifts of your people that the women should work, and the men
hunt; but there's such a thing as moderation in all matters. As for huntin',
I see no good reason why any limits need be set to that, but Hist comes of
too good a stock to toil like a common drudge. One of your means and standin'
need never want for corn, or potatoes, or any thing that the fields yield;
therefore, I hope the hoe will never be put into the hands of any wife of
yourn. You know I am not quite a beggar, and all I own, whether in
ammunition, skins, arms, or calicoes, I give to Hist, should I not come back
to claim them by the end of the season. This will set the maiden up, and will
buy labor for her, for a long time to come. I suppose I need n't tell you to
love the young woman, for that you do already, and whomsoever the man ra'ally
loves, he'll be likely enough to cherish. Nevertheless, it can do no harm to
say that kind words never rankle, while bitter words do. I know you're a man,
Sarpent, that is less apt to talk in his own lodge, than to speak at the
Council Fire; but forgetful moments may overtake us all, and the practyse of
kind doin', and kind talkin', is a wonderful advantage in keepin' peace in a
cabin, as well as on a hunt."

"My ears are open," returned the Delaware gravely; "the words of my brother
have entered so far that they never can fall out again. They are like rings,
that have no end, and cannot drop. Let him speak on; the song of the wren and
the voice of a friend never tire."

"I will speak a little longer, chief, but you will excuse it for the sake of
old companionship, should I now talk about myself. If the worst comes to the
worst, it's not likely there'll be much left of me but ashes, so a grave
would be useless, and a sort of vanity. On that score I'm no way partic'lar,
though it might be well enough to take a look at the remains of the pile, and
should any bones, or pieces be found, 'twould be more decent to gather them
together, and bury them, than to let them lie for the wolves to gnaw at, and
howl over. These matters can make no great difference in the mind, but men of
white blood and christian feelin's have rather a gift for graves."

"It shall be done as my brother says," returned the Indian, gravely. "If his
mind is full, let him empty it in the bosom of a friend."

"I thank you, Sarpent; my mind's easy enough; yes, it's tolerable easy. Idees
will come uppermost that I'm not apt to think about in common, it's true, but
by striving ag'in some, and lettin' other some out, all will come right, in
the long run. There's one thing, howsever, chief, that does seem to me to be
onreasonable, and ag'in natur', though the missionaries say it's true, and
bein' of my religion and colour I feel bound to believe them. They say an
Injin may torment and tortur' the body to his heart's content, and scalp, and
cut, and tear, and burn, and consume all his inventions and deviltries, until
nothin' is left but ashes, and they shall be scattered to the four winds of
heaven, yet when the trumpet of God shall sound, all will come together
ag'in, and the man will stand forth in his flesh, the same creatur' as to
looks, if not as to feelin's, that he was afore he was harmed!"

"The missionaries are good men - mean well," returned the Delaware
courteously; "they are not great medicines. They think all they say,
Deerslayer; that is no reason why warriors and orators should be all ears.
When Chingachgook shall see the father of Tamenund standing in his scalp, and
paint, and war lock, then will he believe the missionaries."

"Seem' is believin', of a sartainty; ahs! me-and some of us may see these
things sooner than we thought. I comprehind your meanin' about Tamenund's
father, Sarpent, and the idee's a close idee. Tamenund is now an elderly man,
say eighty every day of it, and his father was scalped, and tormented, and
burnt, when the present prophet was a youngster. Yes, if one could see that
come to pass, there would n't be much difficulty in yieldin' faith to all
that the missionaries say. Howsever, I am not ag'in the opinion now, for you
must know, Sarpent, that the great principle of christianity is to believe
without seeing, and a man should always act up to his religion and
principles, let them be what they may."

"That is strange for a wise nation!" said the Delaware with emphasis. "The
red man looks hard, that he may see and understand."
"Yes, that's plauserble, and is agreeable to mortal pride, but it's not as
deep as it seems. If we could understand all we see, Sarpent there might be
not only sense, but safety, in refusin' to give faith to any one thing that
we might find oncomperhensible; but when there's so many things, about which,
it may be said, we know nothin' at all, why, there's little use, and no
reason, in bein' difficult touchin' any one in partic'lar. For my part,
Delaware, all my thoughts have n't been on the game, when outlyin' in the
hunts and scoutin's, of our youth. Many's the hour I've passed, pleasantly
enough too, in what is tarmed conterplation by my people. On such occasions
the mind is actyve, though the body seems lazy and listless. An open spot on
a mountain side, where a wide look can be had at the heavens and the 'arth,
is a most judicious place for a man to get a just idee of the power of the
Manitou, and of his own littleness. At such times, there is n't any great
disposition to find fault with little difficulties, in the way of
comperhension, as there are so many big ones to hide them. Believin' comes
easy enough to me, at such times, and, if the Lord made man first out
of'arth, as they tell me it is written in the bible; then turns him into
dust, at death; I see no great difficulty in the way to bringin' him back in
the body, though ashes be the only substance left. These things lie beyond
our understandin', though they may and do lie so close to our feelin's. But,
of all the doctrines, Sarpent, that which disturbs me, and disconsarts my
mind the most, is the one which teaches us to think that a pale face goes to
one heaven, and a red skin to another; it may separate in death, them which
lived much together, and loved each other well, in life!"
"Do the missionaries teach their white brethren to think it is so?" demanded
the Indian, with serious earnestness. 'The Delawares believe that good men
and brave warriors will hunt together in the same pleasant woods, let them
belong to whatever tribe they may; that all the unjust Indians and cowards,
will have to sneak in with the dogs and the wolves, to get venison for their
lodges."

"Tis wonderful how many consaits mankind have consarnin' happiness and
misery, here after!" exclaimed the hunter, borne away by the power of his own
thoughts. 'Some believe in burnin's and flames, and some think punishment is
to eat with the wolves and dogs. Then, ag'in, some fancy heaven to be only
the carryin' out of their own 'arthly longin's, while others fancy it all
gold and shinin' lights! Well, I've an idee of my own, in that matter, which
is just this, Sarpent. Whenever I've done wrong, I've ginirally found 'twas
owin' to some blindness of the mind, which hid the right from view, and when
sight has returned, then has come sorrow and repentance. Now, I consait that,
after death, when the body is laid aside or, if used at all, is purified and
without its longin's, the spirit sees all things in their ra'al lights and
never becomes blind to truth and justice. Such bein' the case, all that has
been done in life, is beheld as plainly as the sun is seen at noon; the good
brings joy, while the evil brings sorrow. There's nothin' onreasonable in
that, but it's agreeable to every man's exper'ence."

"I thought the pale faces believed all men were wicked; who then could ever
find the white man's heaven?"

"That's ingen'ous, but it falls short of the missionary teachin's. You'll be
christianized one day, I make no doubt, and then 'twill all come plain
enough. You must know, Sarpent, that there's been a great deed of salvation
done, that, by God's help, enables all men to find a pardon for their
wickednesses, and that is the essence of the white man's religion. I can't
stop to talk this matter over with you any longer, for Hetty's in the canoe,
and the furlough takes me away, but the time will come I hope, when you'll
feel these things; for, after all, they must be felt rather than reasoned
about. Ah's! me; well, Delaware, there's my hand; you know it's that of a
fri'nd, and will shake it as such, though it never has done you one half the
good its owner wishes it had."

The Indian took the offered hand, and returned its pressure warmly. Then
falling back on his acquired stoicism of manner, which so many mistake for
constitutional indifference, he drew up in reserve, and prepared to part from
his friend with dignity. Deerslayer, however, was more natural, nor would he
have at all cared about giving way to his feelings, had not the recent
conduct and language of Judith given him some secret, though ill defined
apprehensions of a scene. He was too humble to imagine the truth concerning
the actual feelings of that beautiful girl, while he was too observant not to
have noted the struggle she had maintained with herself, and which had so
often led her to the very verge of discovery. That something extraordinary
was concealed in her breast, he thought obvious enough, and, through a
sentiment of manly delicacy that would have done credit to the highest human
refinement, he shrunk from any exposure of her secret that might subsequently
cause regret to the girl, herself. He, therefore, determined to depart, now,
and that without any further manifestations of feeling either from him, or
from others.

"God bless you! Sarpent-God bless you!" cried the hunter, as the canoe left
the side of the platform. "Your Manitou and my God, only know when and where
we shall meet agin; I shall count it a great blessing, and a full reward for
any little good I may have done on 'art, if we shall be permitted to know
each other, and to consort together, 