 the tree-tops had
disappeared, but he soon found that the canoe was slowly turning, so as to
prevent his getting a view of any thing at his peep-hole, but of the two
extremities of the lake. He now bethought him of the stick, which was
crooked, and offered some facilities for rowing, without the necessity of
rising. The experiment succeeded on trial, better even than he had hoped,
though his great embarrassment was to keep the canoe straight. That his
present manoeuvre was seen, soon became apparent by the clamor on the shore,
and a bullet entering the stern of the canoe, traversed its length whistling
between the arms of our hero, and passed out at the head. This satisfied the
fugitive that he was getting away with tolerable speed, and induced him to
increase his efforts. He was making a stronger push than common, when another
messenger from the point, broke the stick out-board, and at once deprived him
of his oar. As the sound of voices seemed to grow more and more distant,
however, Deerslayer determined to leave all to the drift, until he believed
himself beyond the reach of bullets. This was nervous work, but it was the
wisest of all the expedients that offered, and the young man was encouraged
to persevere in it, by the circumstance that he felt his face fanned by the
air, a proof that there was a little more wind.




Chapter XXVIII.

"Nor widows' tears, nor tender orphans' cries
Can stop th' invader's force;
Nor swelling seas, nor threatening skies,
Prevent the pirate's course:
Their lives to selfish ends decreed
Through blood and rapine they proceed;
No anxious thoughts of ill repute,
Suspend the impetuous and unjust pursuit;
But power and wealth obtain'd, guilty and great,
Their fellow creatures' fears they raise, or urge their hate."

Congreve, "Pindaric Ode," ii.



By this time, Deerslayer had been twenty minutes in the canoe, and he began
to grow a little impatient for some signs of relief from his friends. The
position of the boat still prevented his seeing in any direction, unless it
were up or down the lake, and, though he knew that his line of sight must
pass within a hundred yards of the castle, it, in fact, passed that distance
to the westward of the buildings. The profound stillness troubled him also,
for he knew not whether to ascribe it to the increasing space between him and
the Indians, or to some new artifice. At length, wearied with fruitless
watchfulness, the young man turned himself on his back, closed his eyes, and
awaited the result in determined acquiescence. If the savages could so
completely control their thirst for revenge, he was resolved to be as calm as
themselves, and to trust his fate to the interposition of the currents and
air.

Some additional ten minutes may have passed in this quiescent manner, on both
sides, when Deerslayer thought he heard a slight noise, like a low rubbing
against the bottom of his canoe. He opened his eyes of course, in expectation
of seeing the face or arm of an Indian rising from the water, and found that
a canopy of leaves was impending directly over his head. Starting to his
feet, the first object that met his eye was Rivenoak, who had so far aided
the slow progress of the boat, as to draw it on the point, the grating on the
strand being the sound that had first given our hero the alarm. The change in
the drift of the canoe, had been altogether owing to the baffling nature of
the light currents of the air, aided by some eddies in the water.

"Come," said the Huron with a quiet gesture of authority, to order his
prisoner to land, 'my young friend has sailed about till he is tired; he will
forget how to run again, unless he uses his legs."

"You've the best of it, Huron," returned Deerslayer, stepping steadily from
the canoe, and passively following his leader to the open area of the point;
"Providence has helped you in an onexpected manner. I'm your prisoner ag'in,
and I hope you'll allow that I'm as good at breaking gaol, as I am at keeping
furloughs."

"My young friend is a Moose!" exclaimed the Huron. "His legs are very long;
they have given my young men trouble. But he is not a fish; he cannot find
his way in the lake. We did not shoot him; fish are taken in nets, and not
killed by bullets. When he turns Moose, again, he will be treated like a
Moose."

'Ay, have your talk, Rivenoak; make the most of your advantage. 'Tis your
right, I suppose, and I know it is your gift. On that p'int there'll be no
words atween us, for all men must and ought to follow their gifts. Howsever,
when your women begin to ta'nt and abuse me, as I suppose will soon happen,
let 'em remember that if a pale face struggles for life so long as it's
lawful and manful, he knows how to loosen his hold on it, decently, when he
feels that the time has come. I'm your captyve; work your will on me."

"My brother has had a long run on the hills, and a pleasant sail on the
water," returned Rivenoak, more mildly, smiling, at the same time, in a way
that his listener knew denoted pacific intentions. 'He has seen the woods; he
has seen the water. Which does he like best? Perhaps, he has seen enough, to
change his mind, and make him hear reason."

"Speak out, Huron. Something is in your thoughts, and the sooner it is said,
the sooner you'll get my answer."

"That is straight! There is no turning in the talk of my pale face friend,
though he is a fox in running. I will speak to him; his ears are now open
wider than before, and his eyes are not shut. The Sumach is poorer than ever.
Once she had a brother and a husband. She had children, too. The time came
and the husband started for the Happy Hunting Grounds, without saying
farewell; he left her alone with his children. This he could not help, or he
would not have done it; le Loup Cervier was a good husband. It was pleasant
to see the venison, and wild ducks, and geese, and bear's meat, that hung in
his lodge, in winter. It is now gone; it will not keep in warm weather. Who
shall bring it back again? Some thought the brother would not forget his
sister, and that, next winter, he would see that the lodge should not be
empty. We thought this; but the Panther yelled, and followed the husband on
the path of death. They are now trying which shall first reach the Happy
Hunting Grounds. Some think the Lynx can run fastest, and some think the
Panther can jump the farthest. The Sumach thinks both will travel so fast and
so far that neither will ever come back. Who shall feed her and her young?
The man who told her husband and her brother to quit her lodge, that there
might be room for him to come into it. He is a great hunter, and we know that
the woman will never want."

"Ay, Huron this is soon settled, accordin' to your notions, but it goes
sorely ag'in the grain of a white man's feelin's. I've heard of men's saving
their lives this-a-way, and I've know'd them that would prefar death to such
a sort of captivity. For my part, I do not seek my end, nor do I seek
matrimony."

'The pale face will think of this, while my people get ready for the council.
He will be told what will happen. Let him remember how hard it is to lose a
husband and a brother. Go; when we want him, the name of Deerslayer will be
called."

This conversation had been held with no one near but the speakers. Of all the
band that had so lately thronged the place, Rivenoak alone was visible. The
rest seemed to have totally abandoned the spot. Even the furniture, clothes,
arms, and other property of the camp had entirely disappeared, and the place
bore no other proofs of the crowd that had so lately occupied it, than the
traces of their fires and resting places, and the trodden earth, that still
showed the marks of their feet. So sudden and unexpected a change caused
Deerslayer a good deal of surprise and some uneasiness, for he had never
known it to occur, in the course of his experience among the Delawares. He
suspected, however, and rightly, that a change of encampment was intended,
and that the mystery of the movement was resorted to, in order to work on his
apprehensions.

Rivenoak walked up the vista of trees, as soon as he ceased speaking, leaving
Deerslayer by himself. The chief disappeared behind the covers of the forest,
and one unpractised in such scenes might have believed the prisoner left to
the dictates of his own judgment. But the young man, while he felt a little
amazement at the dramatic aspect of things, knew his enemies too well to
fancy himself at liberty, or a free agent. Still, he was ignorant how far the
Hurons meant to carry their artifices, and he determined to bring the
question, as soon as practicable, to the proof. Affecting an indifference he
was far from feeling, he strolled about the area, gradually getting nearer
and nearer to the spot where he had landed, when he suddenly quickened his
pace, though carefully avoiding all appearance of flight, and pushing aside
the bushes, he stepped upon the beach. The canoe was gone, nor could he see
any traces of it, after walking to the northern and southern verges of the
point, and examining the shores in both directions. It was evidently removed
beyond his reach and knowledge, and under circumstances to show that such had
been the intention of the savages.

Deerslayer now better understood his actual situation. He was a prisoner on
the narrow tongue of land, vigilantly watched beyond a question, and with no
other means of escape than that of swimming. He, again, thought of this last
expedient, but the certainty that the canoe would be sent in chase, and the
desperate nature of the chances of success deterred him from the undertaking.
While on the strand, he came to a spot where the bushes had been cut, and
thrust into a small pile. Removing a few of the upper branches, he found
beneath them the dead body of the Panther. He knew that it was kept until the
savages might find a place to inter it, where it would be beyond the reach of
the scalping knife. He gazed wistfully towards the castle, but there all
seemed to be silent and desolate, and a feeling of loneliness and desertion
came over him to increase the gloom of the moment.

'God's will be done!" murmured the young man, as he walked sorrowfully away
from the beach, entering again beneath the arches of the wood. 'God's will be
done, on 'arth as it is in heaven! I did hope that my days would not be
numbered so soon, but it matters little a'ter all. A few more winters, and a
few more summers, and 'twould have been over, accordin' to natur'. Ah's! me,
the young and actyve seldom think death possible, till he grins in their
faces, and tells 'em the hour is come!"

While this soliloquy was being pronounced, the hunter advanced into the area,
where to his surprise he saw Hetty alone, evidently awaiting his return. The
girl carried the bible under her arm, and her face, over which a shadow of
gentle melancholy was usually thrown, now seemed sad, and downcast. Moving
nearer, Deerslayer spoke.

"Poor Hetty," he said, "times have been so troublesome, of late, that I'd
altogether forgotten you; we meet, as it might be to mourn over what is to
happen. I wonder what has become of Chingachgook and Wah!"

"Why did you kill the Huron, Deerslayer? -" returned the girl reproachfully.
'Don't you know your commandments, which say 'Thou shalt not kill!' They tell
me you have now slain the woman's husband and brother!"

"It's true, my good Hetty-'tis gospel truth, and I'll not deny what has come
to pass. But, you must remember, gal, that many things are lawful in war,
which would be onlawful in peace. The husband was shot in open fight-or, open
so far as I was consarned, while he had a better cover than common-and the
brother brought his end on himself, by casting his tomahawk at an unarmed
prisoner. Did you witness that deed, gal?"

"I saw it, and was sorry it happened, Deerslayer, for I hoped you wouldn't
have returned blow for blow, but good for evil."

"Ah, Hetty, that may do among the Missionaries, but 'twould make an onsartain
life in the woods! The Panther craved my blood, and he was foolish enough to
throw arms into my hands, at the very moment he was striving a'ter it.
'Twould have been ag'in natur? not to raise a hand in such a trial, and
'twould have done discredit to my training and gifts. No- no -I'm as willing
to give every man his own, as another, and so I hope you'll testify to them
that will be likely to question you as to what you've seen this day."

"Deerslayer, do you mean to marry Sumach, now she has neither husband nor
brother to feed her?"

"Are such your idees of matrimony, Hetty! Ought the young to wive with the
old-the pale face with the red skin-the christian with the heathen? It's
ag'in reason and natur', and so you'll see, if you think of it a moment."

"I've always heard mother say," returned Hetty, averting her face more from a
feminine instinct, than from any consciousness of wrong, "that people should
never marry, until they loved each other better than brothers and sisters,
and I suppose that is what you mean. Sumach is old, and you are young!"

"Ay and she's red, and I'm white. Beside, Hetty, suppose you was a wife, now,
having married some young man of your own years, and state, and colour-Hurry
Harry, for instance-" Deerslayer selected this example, simply from the
circumstance that he was the only young man known to both-"and that he had
fallen on a war path, would you wish to take to your bosom, for a husband,
the man that slew him?"

'Oh! no, no, no-" returned the girl shuddering-"That would be wicked as well
as heartless! No christian girl could, or would do that! I never shall be the
wife of Hurry, I know, but were he my husband no man should ever be it,
again, after his death!"

"I thought it would get to this, Hetty, when you come to understand
sarcumstances. 'Tis a moral impossibility that I should ever marry Sumach,
and, though Injin weddin's have no priests and not much religion, a white man
who knows his gifts and duties can't profit by that, and so make his escape
at the fitting time. I do think, death would be more nat'ral like, and
welcome, than wedlock with this woman."

"Don't say it too loud," interrupted Hetty impatiently; "I suppose she will
not like to hear it. I'm sure Hurry would rather marry even me than suffer
torments, though I am feeble minded; and I am sure it would kill me to think
he'd prefer death to being my husband."

"Ay, gal, you an't Sumach, but a comely young Christian, with a good heart,
pleasant smile, and kind eye. Hurry might be proud to get you, and that, too,
not in misery and sorrow, but in his best and happiest days. Howsever, take
my advice, and never talk to Hurry about these things; he's only a borderer,
at the best."

"I would n't tell him, for the world!" exclaimed the girl, looking about her,
like one affrighted, and blushing, she knew not why. "Mother always said
young women should n't be forward, and speak their minds before they're
asked; Oh! I never forget what mother told me. Tis a pity Hurry is so
handsome, Deerslayer; I do think fewer girls would like him then, and he
would sooner know his own mind."

"Poor gal, poor gal, it's plain enough how it is, but the Lord will bear in
mind one of your simple heart, and kind feelin's! We'll talk no more of these
things; if you had reason, you'd be sorrowful at having let others so much
into your secret. Tell me, Hetty, what has become of all the Hurons, and why
they let you roam about the p'int, as if you, too, was a prisoner?"

'I'm no prisoner, Deerslayer, but a free girl, and go when and where I
please. Nobody dare hurt me! If they did, God would be angry, as I can show
them in the bible. No-no- Hetty Hutter is not afraid; she's in good hands.
The Hurons are up yonder in the woods, and keep a good watch on us both, I'll
answer for it, since all the women and children are on the look-out. Some are
burying the body of the poor girl who was shot, so that the enemy and the
wild beasts can't find it. I told 'em that father and mother lay in the lake,
but I would n't let them know, in what part of it, for Judith and I don't
want any of their heathenish company, in our burying ground."

"Ahs! me;-Well, it is an awful despatch to be standing here, alive and angry,
and with the feelin's up and ferocious, one hour, and then to be carried away
at the next, and put out of sight of mankind in a hole in the 'arth! No one
knows what will happen to him on a warpath, that's sartain."

Here the stirring of leaves and the cracking of dried twigs interrupted the
discourse, and apprised Deerslayer of the approach of his enemies. The Hurons
closed around the spot that had been prepared for the coming scene, and in
the centre of which the intended victim now stood, in a circle, the armed men
being so distributed, among the feebler members of the band, that there was
no safe opening through which the prisoner could break. But the latter no
longer contemplated flight, the recent trial having satisfied him of his
inability to escape when pursued so closely by numbers. On the contrary, all
his energies were aroused, in order to meet his expected fate, with a
calmness that should do credit to his colour and his manhood; one equally
removed from recreant alarm, and savage boasting.

When Rivenoak re-appeared in the circle, he occupied his old place at the
head of the area. Several of the elder warriors stood near him, but, now that
the brother of Sumach had fallen, there was no longer any recognised chief
present, whose influence and authority offered a dangerous rivalry to his
own. Nevertheless, it is well known that little which could be called
monarchical, or despotic entered into the politics of the North American
tribes, although the first colonists, bringing with them to this hemisphere,
the notions and opinions of their own countries, often dignified the chief
men of those primitive nations, with the titles of kings and princes.
Hereditary influence did certainly exist, but there is much reason to believe
it existed rather as a consequence of hereditary merit and acquired
qualifications, than as a birth-right. Rivenoak, however, had not even this
claim, having risen to consideration purely by the force of talents,
sagacity, and, as Bacon expresses it, in relation to all distinguished
statesmen, "by a union of great and mean qualities;" a truth of which the
career of the profound Englishman himself furnishes so apt an illustration.
Next to arms, eloquence offers the great avenue to popular favor, whether it
be in civilized or savage life, and Rivenoak had succeeded, as so many have
succeeded, before him, quite as much by rendering fallacies acceptable to his
listeners, as by any profound or learned expositions of truth, or the
accuracy of his logic. Nevertheless, he had influence; and was far from being
altogether without just claims to its possession. Like most men who reason
more than they feel, the Huron was not addicted to the indulgence of the more
ferocious passions of his people: he had been commonly found on the side of
mercy, in all the scenes of vindictive torture and revenge that had occurred
in his tribe, since his own attainment to power. On the present occasion, he
was reluctant to proceed to extremities, although the provocation was so
great. Still it exceeded his ingenuity to see how that alternative could well
be avoided. Sumach resented her rejection more than she did the deaths of her
husband and brother, and there was little probability that the woman would
pardon a man who had so unequivocally preferred death to her embraces.
Without her forgiveness, there was scarce a hope that the tribe could be
induced to overlook its loss, and even to Rivenoak, himself, much as he was
disposed to pardon, the fate of our hero now appeared to be almost hopelessly
sealed.

When the whole band was arrayed around the captive, a grave silence, so much
the more threatening from its profound quiet, pervaded the place. Deerslayer
perceived that the women and boys had been preparing splinters of the fat
pine roots, which he well knew were to be stuck into his flesh, and set in
flames, while two or three of the young men held the thongs of bark with
which he was to be bound. The smoke of a distant lire announced that the
burning brands were in preparation, arid several of the elder warriors passed
their fingers over the edges of their tomahawks, as if to prove their
keenness and temper. Even the knives seemed loosened in their sheathes,
impatient for the bloody and merciless work to begin.

"Killer of the Deer," recommenced Rivenoak, certainly without any signs of
sympathy or pity in his manner, though with calmness and dignity, "Killer of
the Deer, it is time that my people knew their minds. The sun is no longer
over our heads; tired of waiting on the Hurons, he has begun to fall near the
pines on this side of the valley. He is travelling fast towards the country
of our French fathers; it is to warn his children that their lodges are
empty, and that they ought to be at home. The roaming wolf has his den, and
he goes to it, when he wishes to see his young. The Iroquois are not poorer
than the wolves. They have villages, and wigwams, and fields of corn; the
Good Spirits will be tired of watching them alone. My people must go back,
and see to their own business. There will be joy in the lodges when they hear
our whoop from the forest! It will he a sorrowful whoop; when it is
understood, grief will come after it. There will be one scalp-whoop, but
there will be only one. We have the fur of the Muskrat; his body is among the
fishes. Deerslayer must say whether another scalp shall he on our pole. Two
lodges are empty; a scalp, living or dead, is wanted at each door."

"Then take 'em dead, Huron," firmly, but altogether without dramatic
boasting, returned the captive. "My hour is come, I do suppose, and what must
be, must. If you are bent on the tortur', I'll do my indivours to bear up
ag'in it, though no man can say how far his natur' will stand pain, until
he's been tried."

"The pale face cur begins to put his tail between his legs!" cried a young
and garrulous savage, who bore the appropriate title of the Corbeau Rouge; a
sobriquet he had gained from the French, by his facility in making
unseasonable noises, and an undue tendency to hear his own voice; "he is no
warrior; he has killed the Loup Cervier when looking behind him not to see
the flash of his own rifle. He grunts like a hog, already; when the Huron
women begin to torment him, he will cry like the young of the catamount. He
is a Delaware woman, dressed in the skin of a Yengeese!"

"Have your say, young man; have your say," returned Deerslayer, unmoved; "you
know no better, and I can overlook it. Talking may aggravate women, but can
hardly make knives sharper, fire hotter, or rifles more sartain."

Rivenoak now interposed, reproving the Red Crow for his premature
interference, and then directing the proper persons to bind the captive. This
expedient was adopted, not from any apprehensions that he would escape, or
from any necessity, that was yet apparent, of his being unable to endure the
torture with his limbs free, but from an ingenious design of making him feel
his helplessness, and of gradually sapping his resolution, by undermining it,
as it might be, little by little. Deerslayer offered no resistance. He
submitted his arms and legs, freely if not cheerfully, to the ligaments of
bark, which were bound around them, by order of the chief, in a way to
produce as little pain as possible. These directions were secret, and given
in the hope that the captive would finally save himself from any serious
bodily suffering, by consenting to take the Sumach for a wife. As soon as the
body of Deerslayer was withed in bark sufficiently to create a lively sense
of helplessness, he was literally carried to a young tree, and bound against
it, in a way that effectually prevented him from moving, as well as from
falling. The hands were laid flat against the legs, and thongs were passed
over all, in a way nearly to incorporate the prisoner with the tree. His cap
was then removed, and he was left half-standing, half-sustained by his bonds,
to face the coming scene, in the best manner he could.

Previously to proceeding to any thing like extremities, it was the wish of
Rivenoak to put his captive's resolution to the proof, by renewing the
attempt at a compromise. This could be effected only in one manner, the
acquiescence of the Sumach being indispensably necessary to a compromise of
her right to be revenged. With this view, then, the woman was next desired to
advance, and to look to her own interests; no agent being considered as
efficient as the principal, herself, in this negotiation. The Indian females,
when girls, are usually mild, and submissive, with musical tones, pleasant
voices, and merry laughs, but toil and suffering generally deprive them of
most of these advantages, by the time they have reached an age which the
Sumach had long before passed. To render their voices harsh, it would seem to
require active, malignant, passions, though, when excited, their screams can
rise to a sufficiently conspicuous degree of discordancy, to assert their
claim to possess this distinctive peculiarity of the sex. The Sumach was not
altogether without feminine attraction, however, and had so recently been
deemed handsome in her tribe, as not to have yet learned the full influence
that time and exposure produce on man, as well as on woman. By an arrangement
of Riven-oak's, some of the women around her, had been employing the time in
endeavoring to persuade the bereaved widow, that there was still a hope
Deerslayer might be prevailed on to enter her wigwam, in preference to
entering the world of spirits, and this, too, with a success that previous
symptoms scarcely justified. All this was the result of a resolution on the
part of the chief to leave no proper means unemployed, in order to get
transferred to his own nation the greatest hunter that was then thought to
exist in all that region, as well as a husband for a woman who he felt would
be likely to be troublesome, were any of her claims to the attention and care
of the tribe overlooked.

In conformity with this scheme, the Sumach had been secretly advised to
advance into the circle, and to make her appeal to the prisoner's sense of
justice, before the band had recourse to the last experiment. The woman,
nothing loth, consented, for there was some such attraction in becoming the
wife of a noted hunter, among the females of the tribes, as is experienced by
the sex, in more refined life, when they bestow their hands on the affluent.
As the duties of a mother were thought to be paramount to all other
considerations, the widow felt none of that embarrassment, in preferring her
claims, to which even a female fortune hunter among ourselves, might be
liable. When she stood forth, before the whole party, therefore, the children
that she led by the hands, fully justified all she did.

"You see me before you, cruel pale face," the woman commenced; "your spirit
must tell you my errand. I have found you; I cannot find le Loup Cervier, nor
the Panther; I have looked for them, in the lake, in the woods, in the
clouds. I cannot say where they have gone."

"No man knows, good Sumach, no man knows," interposed the captive. "When the
spirit leaves the body, it passes into a world beyond our knowledge, and the
wisest way, for them that are left behind, is to hope for the best. No doubt
both your warriors, have gone to the Happy Hunting Grounds, and at the proper
time you will see 'em ag'in, in their improved state. The wife and sister of
braves, must have looked forward to some such tarmination of their 'arthly
careers."

"Cruel pale-face, what had my warriors done that you should slay them! They
were the best hunters, and the boldest young men of their tribe; the Great
Spirit intended that they should live until they withered like the branches
of the hemlock, and fell of their own weight-"

"Nay - nay - good Sumach," interrupted Deerslayer, whose love of truth was
too indomitable to listen to such hyperbole, with patience, even though it
came from the torn breast of a widow-"Nay-nay, good Sumach, this is a little
out-doing red skin privileges. Young man was neither, any more than you can
be called a young woman, and as to the Great Spirit's intending that they
should fall otherwise than they did, that's a grievous mistake, inasmuch as
what the Great Spirit intends, is sartain to come to pass. Then, agin, it's
plain enough neither of your fri'nds did me any harm; ~ raised my hand ag'in
'em on account of what they were striving to do, rather than what they did.
This is nat'ral law, 'to do lest you should be done by.'"

"It is so. Sumach has but one tongue; she can tell but one story. The Pale
face struck the Hurons lest the Hurons should strike him. The Hurons are a
just nation; they will forget it. The chiefs will shut their eyes and pretend
not to have seen it; the young men will believe the Panther and the Lynx have
gone to far off hunts, and the Sumach, will take her children by the hand,
and go into the lodge of the pale face and say- 'See; these are your
children; they are also mine-feed us, and we will live with you.'

"The tarms are onadmissable, woman, and though I feel for your losses, which
must he hard to bear, the tarms cannot be accepted. As to givin' you ven'son,
in case we lived near enough together, that would be no great expl'ite; but
as for becomin' your husband, and the father of your children, to be honest
with you, I feel no callin' that-a-way."

"Look at this boy, cruel pale face; he has no father to teach him to kill the
deer, or to take scalps. See this girl; what young man will come to look for
a wife in a lodge that has no head? There are more among my people in the
Canadas, and the Killer of Deer will find as many mouths to feed, as his
heart can wish for."

"I tell you, woman," exclaimed Deerslayer, whose imagination was far from
seconding the appeal of the widow, and who began to grow restive under the
vivid pictures she was drawing, "all this is nothing to me. People and
kindred must take care of their own fatherless, leaving them that have no
children to their own loneliness. As for me, I have no offspring, and I want
no wife. Now, go away Sumach; leave me in the hands of your chiefs, for my
colour, and gifts, and natur' itself cry out ag'in the idee of taking you for
a wife."

It is unnecessary to expatiate on the effect of this downright refusal of the
woman's proposals. If there was any thing like tenderness in her bosom-and no
woman was probably ever entirely without that feminine quality-it all
disappeared at this plain announcement. Fury, rage, mortified pride, and a
volcano of wrath burst out, at one explosion, converting her into a sort of
maniac, as it might beat the touch of a magician's  wand. Without deigning a
reply in words, she made the arches of the forest ring with screams, and then
flew forward at her victim, seizing him by the hair, which she appeared
resolute to draw out by the roots. It was some time before her grasp could be
loosened. Fortunately for the prisoner her rage was blind; since his total
helplessness left him entirely at her mercy. Had it been better directed it
might have proved fatal before any relief could have been offered. As it was,
she did succeed in wrenching out two or three handsful of hair, before the
young men could tear her away from her victim.

The insult that had been offered to the Sumach was deemed an insult to the
whole tribe; not so much, however, on account of any respect that was felt
for the woman, as on account of the honor of the Huron nation. Sumach,
herself, was generally considered to be as acid as the berry from which she
derived her name, and now that her great supporters, her husband and brother,
were both gone, few cared about concealing their aversion. Nevertheless, it
had become a point of honor to punish the pale face who disdained a Huron
woman, and more particularly one who coolly preferred death to relieving the
tribe from the support of a widow and her children. The young men showed an
impatience to begin to torture, that Rivenoak understood, and, as his older
associates manifested no disposition to permit any longer delay, he was
compelled to give the signal, for the infernal work to proceed.




Chapter XXIX.

"The ugly bear now minded not the stake,
Nor how the cruel mastiffs do him tear,
The stag lay still unroused from the brake,
The foamy boar feared not the hunter's spear:
All thing was still in desert, bush, and briar:"

Thomas Sackville; "The Complaint of Henry Duke of Buckingham," lxxxi.



Twas one of the common expedients of the savages, on such occasions, to put
the nerves of their victims to the severest proofs. On the other hand, it was
a matter of Indian pride to betray no yielding to terror, or pain, but for
the prisoner to provoke his enemies to such acts of violence as would soonest
produce death. Many a warrior had been known to bring his own sufferings to a
more speedy termination, by taunting reproaches and reviling language, when
he found that his physical system was giving way under the agony of
sufferings produced by a hellish ingenuity that might well eclipse all that
has been said of the infernal devices of religious persecution. This happy
expedient of taking refuge from the ferocity of his foes, in their passions,
was denied Deerslayer however, by his peculiar notions of the duty of a white
man, and he had stoutly made up his mind to endure every thing, in preference
to disgracing his colour.

No sooner did the young men understand that they were at liberty to commence,
than some of the boldest and most forward among them sprang into the arena,
tomahawk in hand. Here they prepared to throw that dangerous weapon, the
object being to strike the tree as near as possible to the victim's head,
without absolutely hitting him. This was so hazardous an experiment, that
none but those who were known to be exceedingly expert with the weapon, were
allowed to enter the lists, at all, lest an early death might interfere with
the expected entertainment. In the truest hands it was seldom that the
captive escaped injury in these trials, and it often happened that death
followed, even when the blow was not premeditated. In the particular case of
our hero, Rivenoak and the older warriors were apprehensive that the example
of. the Panther's fate might prove a motive with some fiery spirit suddenly
to sacrifice his conqueror, when the temptation of effecting it in precisely
the same manner, and possibly with the identical weapon with which the
warrior had fallen, offered. This circumstance of itself, rendered the ordeal
of the tomahawk doubly critical for the Deerslayer. It would seem, however,
that all who now entered, what we shall call the lists, were more disposed to
exhibit their own dexterity, than to resent the deaths of their comrades.
Each prepared himself for the trial, with the feelings of rivalry, rather
than with the desire for vengeance, and, for the first few minutes, the
prisoner had little more connection with the result, than grew out of the
interest that necessarily attached itself to a living target. The young men
were eager, instead of being fierce, and Rivenoak thought he still saw signs
of being able to save the life of the captive, when the vanity of the young
men had been gratified; always admitting, that it was not sacrificed to the
delicate experiments that were about to be made. The first youth who
presented himself, for the trial, was called The Raven, having as yet had no
opportunity of obtaining a more warlike sobriquet. He was remarkable for high
pretension, rather than for skill,, or exploits, and those who knew his
character thought the captive in imminent danger, when he took his stand, and
poised the tomahawk. Nevertheless, the young man was good natured, and no
thought was uppermost in his mind, other than the desire to make a better
cast, than any of his fellows. Deerslayer got an inkling of this warrior's
want of reputation, by the injunctions that he had received from the seniors,
who, indeed, would have objected to his appearing in the arena, at all, but
for an influence derived from his father; an aged warrior of great merit, who
was then in the lodges of the tribe. Still, our hero maintained an appearance
of self-possession. He had made up his mind that his hour was come, and it
would have been a mercy, instead of a calamity, to fall by the unsteadiness
of the first hand that was raised against him. After a suitable number of
flourishes, and gesticulations that promised much more than he could perform,
the Raven let the tomahawk quit his hand. The weapon whirled through the air,
with the usual evolutions, cut a chip from the sapling to which the prisoner
was bound, within a few inches of his cheek, and stuck in a large oak that
grew several yards behind him. This was decidedly a bad effort, and a common
sneer proclaimed as much, to the great mortification of the young man On the
other hand, there was a general but suppressed murmur of admiration at the
steadiness with which the captive stood the trial. The head was the only part
he could move, and this had been purposely left free, that the tormentors
might have the amusement, and the tormented endure the shame, of his dodging,
and otherwise attempting to avoid the blows. Deerslayer disappointed these
hopes, by a command of nerve that rendered his whole body as immovable as the
tree to which he was bound. Nor did he even adopt the natural and usual
expedient of shutting his eyes, the firmest and oldest warrior of the red-men
never having more disdainfully denied himself this advantage under similar
circumstances.

The Raven had no sooner made his unsuccessful and puerile effort, than he was
succeeded by le Daim-Mose, or the Moose; a middle aged warrior, who was
particularly skilful in the use of the tomahawk, and from whose attempt the
spectators confidently looked for gratification. This man had none of the
good nature of the Raven, but he would gladly have sacrificed the captive to
his hatred of the pale faces generally, were it not for the greater interest
he felt in his own success as one particularly skilled in the use of this
weapon. He took his stand quietly, but with an air of confidence, poised his
little axe but a single instant, advanced a foot with a quick motion, and
threw. Deerslayer saw the keen instrument whirling towards him, and believed
all was over; still, he was not touched. The tomahawk had actually bound the
head of the captive to the tree, by carrying before it some of his hair,
having buried itself deep beneath the soft bark. A general yell expressed the
delight of the spectators, and the Moose felt his heart soften a little
towards the prisoner, whose steadiness of nerve alone, enabled him to give
this evidence of his consummate skill.

Le Daim-Mose was succeeded by the Bounding Boy, or le Garcon qui Bondi who
came leaping into the circle, like a hound, or a goat, at play. This was one
of those elastic youths, whose muscles seemed always in motion, and who
either affected, or who from habit was actually unable, to move in any other
manner, than by showing the antics just mentioned. Nevertheless, he was both
brave and skilful, and had gained the respect of his people, by deeds in war,
as well as success in the hunts. A far nobler name would long since have
fallen to his share, had not a French-man of rank inadvertently given him
this sobriquet, which he religiously preserved as coming from his Great
Father, who lived beyond the Wide Salt Lake. The Bounding Boy skipped about
in front of the captive, menacing him with his tomahawk, now on one side and
now on another, and then again in front, in the vain hope of being able to
extort some sign of fear by this parade of danger. At length Deerslayer's
patience became exhausted by all this mummery, and he spoke for the first
time, since the trial had actually commenced.

"Throw away, Huron," he cried, "or your tomahawk will forget its ar'n'd. Why
do you keep loping about like a fa'a'n that's showing its dam how well it can
skip, when you're a warrior grown, yourself, and a warrior grown defies you
and all your silly antiks. Throw, or the Huron gals will laugh in your face."

Although not intended to produce such an effect, the last words aroused the
"Bounding" warrior to fury. The same nervous excitability which rendered him
so active in his person, made it difficult to repress his feelings, and the
words were scarcely past the lips of the speaker, than the tomahawk left the
hand of the Indian. Nor was it cast without ill-will, and a fierce
determination to slay. Had the intention been less deadly, the danger might
have been greater. The aim was uncertain, and the weapon glanced near the
cheek of the captive, slightly cutting the shoulder in its evolutions. This
was the first instance in which any other object, than that of terrifying the
prisoner, and of displaying skill had been manifested, and the Bounding Boy
was immediately led from the arena, and was warmly rebuked for his
intemperate haste, which had come so near defeating all the hopes of the
band.To this irritable person succeeded several other young warriors, who not
only hurled the tomahawk, but who cast the knife, a far more dangerous
experiment, with reckless indifference; yet they always manifested a skill
that prevented any injury to the captive. Several times Deerslayer was
grazed, but in no instance did he receive what might be termed a wound. The
unflinching firmness with which he faced his assailants, more especially in
the sort of rally with which this trial terminated, excited a profound
respect in the spectators, and when the chiefs announced that the prisoner
had well withstood the trials of the, knife and the tomahawk, there was not a
single individual in the band who really felt any hostility towards him, with
the exception 'of Sumach and the Bounding Boy. These two discontented spirits
got together, it is true, feeding each other's ire, but, as yet, their
malignant feelings were confined very much to themselves, though there
existed the danger that the others, ere long, could not fail to be excited by
their own efforts, into that demoniacal state which usually accompanied all
similar scenes among the red men.

Rivenoak now told his people that the pale face had proved himself to be a
man. He might live with the Delawares, but he had not been made woman, with
that tribe. He wished to know whether it was the desire of the Hurons to
proceed any further. Even the gentlest of the females, however, had received
too much satisfaction in the late trials, to forego their expectations of a
gratifying exhibition, and there was but one voice, in the request to
proceed. The politic chief, who had some such desire to receive so celebrated
a hunter into his tribe, as a European Minister has to devise a new and
available means of taxation, sought every plausible means of arresting the
trial in season, for, he well knew, if permitted to go far enough to arouse
the more ferocious passions of the tormentors, it would be as easy to dam the
waters of the great lakes of his own region, as to attempt to arrest them in
their bloody career. He therefore called four or five of the best marksmen to
him, and bid them put the captive to the proof of the rifle, while, at the
same time he cautioned them touching the necessity of their maintaining their
own credit, by the closest attention to the manner of exhibiting their skill.

When Deerslayer saw the chosen warriors step into the circle, with their arms
prepared for service, he felt some such relief, as the miserable sufferer,
who has long endured the agonies of disease, feels at the certain approach of
death. Any trifling variance in the aim of this formidable weapon, would
prove fatal; since, the head being the target, or rather the point it was
desired to graze without injuring, an inch or two of difference in the line
of projection, must at once determine the question of life or death.

In the torture by the rifle there was none of the latitude permitted that
appeared in the case of even Gessler's apple, a hair's breadth being, in
fact, the utmost limits that an expert marksman would allow himself on an
occasion like this. Victims were frequently shot through the head by too
eager, or unskilful hands, and it often occurred that, exasperated by the
fortitude and taunts of the prisoner, death was dealt intentionally, in a
moment of ungovernable irritation. All this Deerslayer well knew, for it was
in relating the traditions of such scenes, as well as of the battles and
victories of their people, that the old men beguiled the long winter
evenings, in their cabins. He now fully expected the end of his career, and
experienced a sort of melancholy pleasure in the idea that he was to fall by
a weapon as much beloved as the rifle. A slight interruption, however, took
place before the business was allowed to proceed.

Hetty Hutter witnessed all that passed, and the scene at first had pressed
upon her feeble mind in a way to paralyze it entirely; but, by this time, she
had rallied, and was growing indignant at the unmerited suffering the Indians
were inflicting on her friend. Though timid, and shy as the young of the
deer, on so many occasions, this right-feeling girl was always intrepid in
the cause of humanity; the lessons of her mother, and the impulses of her own
heart, - perhaps we might say the promptings of that unseen and pure spirit
that seemed ever to watch over and direct her actions - uniting to keep down
the apprehensions of woman, and to impel her to be bold and resolute. She now
appeared in the circle, gentle, feminine, even bashful in mien, as usual, but
earnest in her words and countenance, speaking like one who knew herself to
be sustained by the high authority of God.

"Why do you torment Deerslayer, red-men?" she asked -"What has he done that
you trifle with his life; who has given you the right to be his judges?
Suppose one of your knives, tomahawks had hit him; what Indian among you all
could cure the wound you would make. Besides, in harming Deerslayer, you
injure your own friend; when father and Hurry Harry came after your scalps,
he refused to be of the party, and staid in the canoe by himself. You are
tormenting a good friend, in tormenting this young man!"

The Hurons listened with grave attention, and one among them, who understood
English, translated what had been said into their native tongue. As soon as
Rivenoak was made acquainted with the purport of her address he answered it
in his own dialect; the interpreter conveying it to the girl in English.

"My daughter is very welcome to speak," said the stern old orator, using
gentle intonations and smiling as kindly as if addressing a child-"The Hurons
are glad to hear her voice; they listen to what she says. The Great Spirit
often speaks to men with such tongues. This time, her eyes have not been open
wide enough, to see all that has happened. Deerslayer did not come for our
scalps; that is true; why did he not come? Here they are; on our heads; the
war-locks are ready to be taken hold of; a bold enemy ought to stretch out
his hand to seize them. The Iroquois are too great a nation to punish men
that take scalps. What they do themselves, they like to see others do. Let my
daughter look around her and count my warriors. Had I as many hands as four
warriors, their fingers would be fewer than my people, when they came into
your hunting grounds. Now, a whole hand is missing. Where are the fingers?
Two have been cut off by this pale face; my Hurons wish to see if he did this
by means of a stout heart, or by treachery. Like a skulking fox, or like a
leaping panther."

"You know yourself, Huron, how one of them fell. I saw it, and you all saw
it, too. 'Twas too bloody to look at; but it was not Deerslayer's fault. Your
warrior sought his life, and he defended himself. I do n't know whether this
good book says that it was right, but all men will do that. Come, if you want
to know which of you, can shoot best, give Deerslayer a rifle, and then you
will find how much more expert he is, than any of your warriors; yes, than
all of them together!"

Could one have looked upon such a scene with indifference, he would have been
amused at the gravity with which the savages listened to the translation of
this unusual request. No taunt, no smile mingled with their surprise, for
Hetty had a character and a manner too saintly to subject her infirmity to
the mockings of the rude and ferocious. On the contrary, she was answered
with respectful attention.

"My daughter does not always talk, like a chief at a Council Fire," returned
Rivenoak, "or she would not have said this. Two of my warriors have fallen by
the blows of our prisoner; their grave is too small to hold a third. The
Hurons do not like to crowd their dead. If there is another spirit about to
set out for the far off world, it must not be the spirit of a Huron; it must
be the spirit of a pale face. Go, daughter, and sit by Sumach, who is in
grief; let the Huron warriors show how well they can shoot; let the pale face
show how little he cares for their bullets."

Hetty's mind was unequal to a sustained discussion, and accustomed to defer
to the directions of her seniors she did as told, seating herself passively
on a log, by the side of the Sumach, and averting her face from the painful
scene that was occurring within the circle.

The warriors, as soon as this interruption had ceased, resumed their places,
and again prepared to exhibit their skill. As there was a double object in
view, that of putting the constancy of the captive to the proof, and that of
showing how steady were the hands of the marksmen, under circumstances of
excitement, the distance was small, and, in one sense, safe. But in
diminishing the distance taken by the tormentors, the trial to the nerves of
the captive was essentially increased. The face of Deerslayer, indeed, was
just removed sufficiently from the ends of the guns to escape the effects of
the flash, and his steady eye was enabled to look directly into their
muzzles, as it might be, in anticipation of the fatal messenger that was to
issue from each. The cunning Hurons well knew this fact, and scarce one
levelled his piece without first causing it to point as near as possible at
the forehead of the prisoner, in the hope that his fortitude would fail him,
and that the band would enjoy the triumph of seeing a victim quail under
their ingenious cruelty. Nevertheless each of the competitors was still
careful not to injure, the disgrace of striking prematurely, being second
only to that of failing altogether in attaining the object. Shot after shot
was made; all the bullets coming in close proximity to the Deerslayer's head,
without touching it. Still no one could detect even the twitching of a muscle
on the part of the captive, or the slightest winking of an eye. This
indomitable resolution, which so much exceeded every thing of its kind that
any present had before witnessed, might be referred to three distinct causes.
The first was resignation to his fate, blended with natural steadiness of
deportment; for our hero had calmly made up his mind that he must die, and
preferred this mode to any other; the second was his great familiarity with
this particular weapon, which deprived it of all the terror that is usually
connected with the mere form of the danger; and the third was this
familiarity carried out in practice, to a degree so nice as to enable the
intended victim to tell, within an inch, the precise spot where each bullet
must strike, for he calculated its range by looking in at the bore of the
piece. So exact was Deerslayer's estimation of the line of fire, that his
pride of feeling finally got the better of his resignation, and when five or
six had discharged their bullets into the tree, he could not refrain from
expresing his contempt at their want of hand and eye.

"You may call this shooting, Mingos!" he exclaimed, "but we've squaws among
the Delawares, and I have known Dutch gals on the Mohawk, that could outdo
your greatest indivours. Ondo these arms of mine, put a rifle into my hand