am feeble minded, and the red men
have never harmed me before. I should he sorry to think that they had changed
their minds. I am glad too, Judith, that they haven't hurt Hurry. Deerslayer,
I don't think God will suffer any one to harm. It was very fortunate the
soldiers came as they did though. for fire will burn!"

"It was, indeed fortunate, my sister; God's holy name be forever blessed for
the mercy!"

"I dare say, Judith, you know some of the officers; you used to know so
many!"

Judith made no reply; she hid her face in her hands and groaned. Hetty gazed
at her in wonder; but naturally supposing her own situation was the cause of
this grief, she kindly offered to console her sister.

"Don't mind me, dear Judith," said the affectionate and pure-hearted
creature-"! don't suffer; if I do die, why father and mother are both dead,
and what happens to them, may well happen to me. You know I am of less
account than any of the family; therefore few will think of me after I'm in
the lake."

"No - no - no - poor, dear, dear Hetty!" exclaimed Judith, in an
uncontrollable burst of sorrow, "I, at least, will ever think of you; and
gladly, oh! how gladly would I exchange places with you, to be the pure,
excellent, sinless creature you are!"

Until now, Captain Warley had stood leaning against the door of the cabin;
when this outbreak of feeling, and perchance of penitence, however, escaped
the beautiful girl, he walked slowly and thoughtfully away; even passing the
ensign, then suffering under the surgeon's care, without noticing him.

"I have got my bible here, Judith," returned her sister, in a voice of
triumph. "It's true, I can't read any longer, there's something the matter
with my eyes-you look dim and distant-and so does Hurry, now I look at him-
well, I never could have believed that Henry March would have so dull a
look!-What can be the reason, Judith, that! see so badly, today? I, who
mother always said, had the best eyes in the whole family. Yes, that was it:
my mind was feeble-what people call half-witted-but my eyes were so good!"

Again Judith groaned; this time no feeling of self, no retrospect of the past
caused the pain. It was the  pure,
Heartfelt sorrow of sisterly love, heightened by a sense of the meek humility
and perfect truth of the being before her. At that moment, she would gladly
have given up her own life to save that of Hetty. As the last, however, was
beyond the reach of human power, she felt there was nothing left her but
sorrow. At this moment Warley returned to the cabin, drawn by a secret
impulse he could not withstand, though he felt, just then, as if he would
gladly abandon the American continent for ever, were it practicable. Instead
of pausing at the door, he now advanced so near the pallet of the sufferer as
to come more plainly within her gaze. Hetty could still distinguish large
objects, and her look soon fastened on him.

"Are you the officer that came with Hurry?" she asked- "If you are, we ought
all to thank you, for, though I am hurt, the rest have saved their lives. Did
Harry March tell you, where to find us, and how much need there was for your
services?"

"The news of the party reached us by means of a friendly runner,' returned
the Captain, glad to relieve his feelings by this appearance of a friendly
communication, "and I was immediately sent out to cut it off. It was
fortunate, certainly, that we met Hurry Harry, as you call him, for he acted
as a guide, and it was not less fortunate, that we heard a firing, which I
now understand was merely a shooting at the mark, for it not only quickened
our march, but called us to the right side of the lake. The Delaware saw us
on the shore, with the glass it would seem, and he and Hist, as I find his
squaw is named, did us excellent service. It was really altogether, a
fortunate concurrence of circumstances, Judith?"

"Talk not to me of any thing fortunate, sir," returned the girl huskily,
again concealing her face. "To me the world is full of misery. I wish never
to hear of marks, or rifles, or soldiers, or men, again!"

"Do you know my sister?" asked Hetty, ere the rebuked soldier had time to
rally for an answer. "How came you to know that her name is Judith? You are
right, for that is her name; and I am Hetty, Thomas Hutter's daughters."

"For heaven's sake, dearest sister, -for my sake, beloved Hetty," interposed
Judith, imploringly, "say no more of this!"

Hetty looked surprised, but accustomed to comply, she ceased her awkward and
painful interrogations of Warley, bending her eyes towards the bible which
she still held between her hands, as one would cling to a casket of precious
stones, in a shipwreck, or a conflagration. Her mind now adverted to the
future, losing sight, in a great measure, of the scenes of the past.

"We shall not long be parted, Judith," she said; "when you die, you must be
brought and be buried in the lake, by the side of mother too."

"Would to God, Hetty, that I lay there, at this moment!"

"No, that cannot be, Judith; people must die before they have any right to be
buried. 'Twould be wicked to bury you, or for you to bury yourself, while
living. Once I thought of burying myself; God kept me from that sin."

"You! -You, Hetty Hutter, think of such an act!" exclaimed Judith, looking up
in uncontrollable surprise, for she well knew nothing passed the lips of her
conscientious sister, that was not religiously true.

"Yes, I did, Judith, but God has forgotten-no he forgets nothing-but he has
forgiven it," returned the dying girl, with the subdued manner of a repentant
child. " 'Twas after mother's death; I felt I had lost the best friend I had
on earth, if not the only friend. 'Tis true, you and father were kind to me,
Judith, but I was so feeble-minded, I knew I should only give you trouble;
and then you were so often ashamed of such a sister and daughter, and 'tis
hard to live in a world where all look upon you as below them. I thought
then, if I could bury myself by the side of mother, I should be happier in
the lake, than in the hut."

"Forgive me-pardon me, dearest Hetty-on my bended knees, I beg you to pardon
me, sweet sister, if any word, or act of mine drove you to so maddening and
cruel a thought!"

"Get up, Judith-kneel to God; do n't kneel to me. Just so I felt when mother
was dying! I remembered every thing I had said and done to vex her, and could
have kissed her feet for forgiveness. I think it must be so with all dying
people; though, now I think of it, I don't remember to have had such feelings
on account of father."

Judith arose, hid her face in her apron, and wept. A long pause-one of more
than two hours succeeded, during which Warley entered and left the cabin
several times; apparently uneasy when absent, and yet unable to remain. He
issued various orders, which his men proceeded to execute, and there was an
air of movement in the party, more especially as Mr. Craig, the lieutenant,
had got through the unpleasant duty of burying the dead, and had sent for
instructions from the shore, desiring to know what he was to do with his
detachment. During this interval Hetty slept a little, and Deerslayer and
Chingachgook left the Ark to confer together. But, at the end of the time
mentioned, the Surgeon passed upon the platform, and with a degree of feeling
his comrades had never before observed in one of his habits, he announced
that the patient was rapidly drawing near her end. On receiving this
intelligence the group collected again, curiosity to witness such a death-or
a better feeling-drawing to the spot, men who had so lately been actors in a
scene seemingly~ of so much greater interest and moment. By this time, Judith
had got to be inactive through grief, and Hist alone was performing the
little offices of feminine attention that are so appropriate to the sick bed.
Hetty herself, had undergone no other apparent change, than the general
failing that indicated the near approach of dissolution. All that she
possessed of mind was as clear as ever, and, in some respects, her intellect
perhaps was more than usually active.

"Don't grieve for me so much, Judith," said the gentle sufferer, after a
pause in her remarks-"I shall soon see mother-I think I see her now; her face
is just as sweet and smiling as it used to be! Perhaps when I'm dead, God
will give me all my mind, and I shall become a more fitting companion for
mother, than I ever was before."
"You will be an angel in heaven, Hetty," sobbed the sister; "no spirit there
will be more worthy of its holy residence!"

"I don't understand it quite; still, I know it must be all true; I've read it
in the bible. How dark it's becoming! Can it be night so soon? I can hardly
see you at all-where is Hist?"

"I here, poor girl-Why you no see me."

"I do see you; but I could n't tell whether 'twas you, or Judith. I believe I
shan't see you much longer, Hist."

"Sorry for that, poor Hetty. Never mind - pale face got a heaven for girls as
well as for warrior."

"Where's the Serpent-let me speak to him-Give me his hand-so-I feel it.
Delaware you will love and cherish this young Indian woman - I know how fond
she is of you; you must be fond of her. Don't treat her as some of your
people treat their wives; be a real husband to her. Now, bring Deerslayer
near me; give me his hand."

This request was complied with, and the hunter stood by the side of the
pallet, submitting to the wishes of the girl, with the docility of a child.

"I feel, Deerslayer,' she resumed --- ' though I could n't tell why  -- but I
feel that you and I are not going to part for ever. "Tis a strange feeling! -
- I never had it before -- I wonder what it comes from!"

"Tis God encoraging you in extremity, Hetty; as such it ought to be harbored
and respected. Yes, we shall meet ag'in, though it may be a long time, first,
and in a far distant land."

"Do you mean to be buried in the lake, too? If so, that may account for the
feeling."

"'Tis little likely, gal; 'tis little likely-- but there's a region for
christian souls, where ther's no lakes, nor woods, they say; though why there
should be none of the last, is more than I can account for; seeing that
pleasantness and peace is the object in view. My grave will be found in he
foes, most likely, but I hope my spirit will not be far from yourn."

"So it must be, then. I am too weak-minded to understand these things, but I
feel that you and I will meet again, -- Sister, where are you? -- I feel that
you and I will meet again, --Sister, where are you -- I can't see, now, any
ting but darkness--it must be night, surely!"

"Oh! Hetty, I am here--at your side -- these are my arms that are around
you," sobbed Judith, ' Speak, dearest; is there any thing you wish to say, or
have done, in this awful moment."

By this time Hetty's sight had enirely failed her. Nevertheless death
approached with less than usual of its horrors, as if in tenderness to one of
her half endowed faculties. She was pale as a corpse, but her breathing was
easy and unbroken, while her voice, though lowered almost to a whisper,
remained clear and distinct. When her sister put this question, however, a
blush diffused itself over he features of the dying girl, so faint however as
to be nearly imperceptible; resembling that hue of the rose which is thought
to portray the tint of modesty, rather than the dye of the flower in its
richer bloom. No one but Judith detected this exposure of feeling, one of he
gentle expressions of womanly sensibility even in death. On her however, it
was not lost, nor did she conceal from herself the cause.

"Hurry is here, dearest Hetty --" whispered the sister, with her face so near
the sufferer, as to keep the words from other ears. "Shall I tell him to come
and receive your good wishes?"

A gentle pressure of the hand answered in the affirmative. Then Hurry was
brought to the side of the pallet.  It is probable that this handsom, but
rude woodsman had never before found himself so awkwardly placed, though the
inclination whic Hetty felt for him -- was to pure and ounobrusive to have
created the slightes suspicion of the circumstance in his mind.  He allowed
Judith to put hishard colossal hand between those of Hetty, and stood waiting
the result in awkward silence.

"This is Hurry, dearest,: whispered Judith, bending over her sister, ashamed
to utter the words so as to be audible to herself. "Speak to him, and let him
go."

"What shall I say, Judith?"

"Nay, whatever your own pure spirit teaches, my love. Trust to that, and you
need fear nothing."

"Good bye, Hurry --- " murmured the girl, with a gentle pressure of his hand
-- "I wish you would try and be more like Deerslayer."

These words were uttered with difficulty; a faint flush succeeded them for a
single instant.  Then the hand was relinquished, and Hetty turned her face
aside, as if done with the world.  The mysterious feling that bound her to
the young man, a sentiment so gentle as to be almost imperceptible to
herself, and which could never have existed at all, had her reason possessed
more command over her senses, was forever lost in thoughts of a more
elevated, though scarcely of a purer character.

"Of what are you thinking, my sweet sister?" whispered Judith -- "Tell me,
that I may aid you, at this moment."

"Mother -- I see Mother, now, and bright beings around her in the lake.  Why
is n't father there? -- It's odd, that I can see mother, when I cn't see you!
-- Farewell, Judith.

The last words were uttered after a pause, and her sister had hung over her
some time, in anxious watchfulness, before she perceived that the gentle
spirit had departed.  Thus died Hetty Hutter, one of those mysterious links
between the material and immaterial world, which, while they appear to be
deprived of so much that it is esteemed and necessary for this state of
being, draw so near to, and offer so beautiful an illustration of the truth,
purity, and simplicity of another.



Chapter XXXII


"A baron's chylde to be begylde! it were a cursed dede:
To be felàwe with an outlàwe! Almighty God forbede!
Yea, better were, the pore squyère alone to forest yede,
Then ye sholde say another day, that by my cursed dede
Ye were betrayed: wherefore, good mayde, the best rede that I can,
Is, that I to the grene wode go, alone, a banyshed man."

Thomas Percy, 'Notbrowne	Mayde,' 11. 265-76 from Reliques of Ancient
English Poetriy, Vol. II.



THE day that followed, proved to be melancholy, though one of much activity.
The soldiers, who had so lately been employed in interring their victims,
were now called on to bury their own dead. The scene of the morning had left
a saddened feeling on all the gentlemen of the party, and the rest felt the
influence of a similar sensation, in a variety of ways, and from many causes.
Hour dragged on after hour, until evening arrived, and then came the last
melancholy offices in honor of poor Hetty Hutter. Her body was laid in the
lake, by the side of that of the mother she had so loved and reverenced, the
surgeon, though actually an unbeliever, so far complying with the received
decencies of life, as to read the funeral service over her grave, as he had
previously done over those of the other christian slain! It mattered not; -
that all seeing eye which reads the heart, could not fail to discriminate
between the living and the dead, and the gentle soul of the unfortunate girl,
was already far removed beyond the errors, or deceptions, of any human
ritual. These simple rites, however, were not wholly wanting in suitable
accompaniments. The tears of Judith and Hist were shed freely, and Deerslayer
gazed upon the limpid water, that now flowed over one whose spirit was even
purer than its own mountain springs, with glistening eyes. Even the Delaware
turned aside to conceal his weakness, while the common men gazed on the
ceremony with wondering eyes and chastened feelings.

The business of the day closed with this pious office. By order of the
commanding officer, all retired early to rest, for it
was intended to begin the march homeward, with the return of light. One
party, indeed, bearing the wounded, the prisoners, and the trophies, had left
the castle in the middle of the day, under the guidance of Hurry, intending
to reach the fort by shorter marches. It had been landed on the point, so
often mentioned, or that described in our opening pages, and, when the sun
set, was already encamped on the brow of the long, broken, and ridgy hills,
that fell away towards the valley of the Mohawk. The departure of this
detachment had greatly simplified the duty of the succeeding day,
disencumbering its march of its baggage and wounded, and otherwise leaving
him who had issued the order greater liberty of action.

Judith held no communications with any but Hist, after the death of her
sister, until she retired for the night. Her sorrow had been respected, and
both the females had been left with the body, unintruded on, to the last
moment. The rattling of the drum broke the silence of that tranquil water,
and the echoes of the tattoo were heard among the mountains, so soon after
the ceremony was over, as to preclude the danger of interruption. That star
which had been the guide of Hist, rose on a scene as silent as if the quiet
of nature had never yet been disturbed, by the labors or passions of man. One
solitary sentinel, with his relief, paced the platform throughout the night,
and morning was ushered in, as usual, by the martial beat of the reveille.

Military precision succeeded to the desultory proceedings of border men, and
when a hasty and frugal breakfast was taken, the party began its movement
towards the shore, with a regularity and order, that prevented noise or
confusion. Of all the officers, Warley alone remained. Craig headed the
detachment in advance, Thornton was with the wounded, and Graham accompanied
his patients as a matter of course. Even the chest of Hutter, with all the
more valuable of his effects, was borne away, leaving nothing behind that was
worth the labor of a removal. Judith was not sorry to see that the captain
respected her feelings, and that he occupied himself entirely with the duty
of his command, leaving her to her own discretion and feelings. It was
understood by all, that the place was to be totally abandoned; but beyond
this no explanations were asked or given.'

The soldiers embarked in the Ark, with the captain at their head. He had
enquired of Judith in what way she chose to proceed, and understanding her
wish to remain with Hist to the last moment, he neither molested her with
requests, nor offended her with advice. There was but one safe and familiar
trail to the Mohawk, and on that, at the proper hour, he doubted not that
they should meet in amity, if not in renewed intercourse. When all were on
board, the sweeps were manned, and the Ark moved in its sluggish manner
towards the distant point. Deerslayer and Chingachgook, now lifted two of the
canoes from the water, and placed them in the castle. The windows and door
were then barred, and the house was left by means of the trap, in the manner
already described. On quitting the palisades, Hist was seen in the remaining
canoe, where the Delaware immediately joined her, and paddled away, leaving
Judith standing alone on the platform. Owing to this prompt proceeding,
Deerslayer found himself alone with the beautiful and still weeping mourner.
Too simple to suspect any thing, the young man swept the light boat round,
and received its mistress in it, when he followed the course already taken by
his friend. The direction to the point, led diagonally past, and at no great
distance from, the graves of the dead. As the canoe glided by, Judith, for
the first time that morning spoke to her companion. She said but little;
merely uttering a simple request to stop, for a minute or two, ere she left
the place.

"I may never see this spot again, Deerslayer," she said, "and it contains the
bodies of my mother and sister! Is it not possible, think you, that the
innocence of one of these beings, may answer in the eyes of God, for the
salvation of both?"

"I do n't understand it so, Judith, though I'm no missionary, and am but
poorly taught. Each spirit answers for its own backslidings, though a hearty
repentance will satisfy God's laws."

"Then must my poor poor mother be in heaven! - Bitterly- bitterly-has she
repented of her sins, and surely her sufferings in this life, ought to count
as something against her sufferings in the next!"
	-
"All this goes beyond me, Judith - I strive to do right, here, as the surest
means of keeping all right, hereafter. Hetty was oncommon, as all that know'd
her must allow, and her soul was as fit to consart with angels the hour it
left its body, as that of any saint in the bible!"

"I do believe you only do her justice! Alas! - Alas! - that there should be
so great differences between those who were nursed at the same breast, slept
in the same bed, and dwelt under the same roof! But, no matter-move the
canoe, a little farther east, Deerslayer- the sun so dazzles my eyes that I
cannot see the graves. This is Hetty's, on the right of mother's?"

"Sartain - you ask'd that of us, and all are glad to do as you wish, Judith,
when you do that which is right."

The girl gazed at him near a minute, in silent attention; then she turned her
eyes backward, at the castle. "This lake will soon be entirely deserted," she
said-"and this, too, at a moment when it will be a more secure dwelling place
than ever. What has so lately happened will prevent the Iroquois from
venturing again to visit it, for a long time to come."

"That it will! - yes, that may be set down as sartain. I do not mean to pass
this-a-way, ag'in, so long as the war lasts, for, to my mind no Huron
moccasin will leave its print on the leaves of this forest, until their
traditions have forgotten to tell their young men of their disgrace and
rout."

"And do you so delight in violence and bloodshed?-! had thought better of
you, Deerslayer-believed you one, who could find his happiness in a quiet
domestic home, with an attached and loving wife, ready to study your wishes,
and healthy and dutiful children, anxious to follow in your footsteps, and to
become as honest and just as yourself."

"Lord, Judith, what a tongue you're mistress of! Speech and looks go hand in
hand, like, and what one can't do, the other is pretty sartain to perform!
Such a gal, in a month, might spoil the stoutest warrior in the colony."

"And am I then so mistaken?-Do you really love war, Deerslayer, better than
the hearth, and the affections?"

"I understand your meaning, gal; yes, I do understand what  you mean, I
believe, though I do n't think you altogether understand me. Warrior I may
now call myself, I suppose, for I've both fou't and conquered, which is
sufficient for the name; neither will I deny that I've feelin's for the
callin', which is both manful and honorable, when carried on accordin' to
nat'ral gifts, but I've no relish for blood. Youth is youth, howsever, and a
Mingo is a Mingo. If the young men of this region stood by, and suffered the
vagabonds to overrun the land, why, we might as well all turn Frenchers at
once, and give up country and kin. I'm no fire eater, Judith, or one that
likes fightin' for fightin's sake, but I can see no great difference atween
givin' up territory afore a war, out of a dread of war, and givin' it up
a'ter a war, because we can't help ii, onless it be that the last is the most
manful and honorable."

"No woman would ever wish to see her husband, or brother, stand by, and
submit to insult and wrong, Deerslayer, however she might mourn the necessity
of his running into the dangers of battle. But, you've done enough already,
in clearing this region of the Hurons; since to you is principally owing the
credit of our late victory. Now, listen to me patiently, and answer me with
that native honesty, which it is as pleasant to regard in one of your sex, as
it is unusual to meet with."

Judith paused, for now that she was on the very point of explaining herself,
native modesty asserted its power, notwithstanding the encouragement and
confidence she derived from the great simplicity of her companion's
character. Her cheeks, which had so lately been pale, flushed, and her eyes
lighted with some of their former brilliancy. Feeling gave expression to her
countenance and softness to her voice, rendering her who was always
beautiful, trebly seductive and winning.

"Deerslayer," she said, after a considerable pause, "this is not a moment for
affectation, deception, or a want of frankness of any sort. Here, over my
mother's grave, and over the grave of truth-loving, truth-telling Hetty,
every thing like unfair dealing seems to be out of place. I will, therefore,
speak to you without any reserve, and without any dread of being
misunderstood. You are not an acquaintance of a week, but it appears to me as
if I had known you for years. So much, and so much that is important has
taken place, within that short time, that the sorrows, and dangers, and
escapes of a whole life have been crowded into a few days, and they who have
suffered and acted together in such scenes, ought not to feel like strangers.
I know that what I am about to say might be misunderstood by most men, but I
hope for a generous construction of my course from you. We are not here,
dwelling among the arts and deceptions of the settlements, but young people
who have no occasion to deceive each other, in any manner or form. - I hope I
make myself understood?"

"Sartain, Judith; few convarse better than yourself, and none more agreeable,
like. Your words are as pleasant as your looks."

"It is the manner in which you have so often praised those looks, that gives
me courage to proceed - Still, Deerslayer, it is not easy, for one of my sex
and years to forget all her lessons of infancy, all her habits, and her
natural diffidence, and say openly what her heart feels!"

"Why not, Judith? Why should n't women as well as men deal fairly and
honestly by their fellow creatur's? I see no reason why you should not speak
as plainly as myself, when there is any thing ra'ally important to be said."

This indomitable diffidence, which still prevented the young man from
suspecting the truth, would have completely discouraged the girl, had not her
whole soul, as well as her whole heart, been set upon making a desperate
effort to rescue herself from a future that she dreaded with a horror as
vivid, as the distinctness with which she fancied she foresaw it. This
motive, however, raised her above all common considerations, and she
persevered even to her own surprise, if not to her great confusion.

"I will-I must deal as plainly with you, as I would with poor, dear Hetty,
were that sweet child living!" she continued, turning pale, instead of
blushing, the high resolution by which she was prompted reversing the effect
that such a procedure would ordinarily produce on one of her sex; "yes, I
will smother all other feelings, in the one that is now uppermost! You love
the woods and the life that we pass, here, in the wilderness, away from the
dwellings and towns of the whites."

"As I loved my parents, Judith, when they was living! This very spot, would
be all creation to me, could this war be fairly over, once; and the settlers
kept at a distance."

"Why quit it then?-It has no owner-at least none who can claim a better right
than mine, and that I freely give to you. Were it a kingdom, Deerslayer, I
think I should delight to say the same. Let us then return to it, after we
have seen the priest at the fort, and never quit it again, until God calls us
away to that world where we shall find the spirits of my poor mother and
sister."
A long, thoughtful pause succeeded; Judith here covered her face with both
her hands, after forcing herself to utter so plain a proposal, and Deerslayer
musing equally in sorrow and surprise, on the meaning of the language he had
just heard. At length the hunter broke the silence, speaking in a tone that
was softened to gentleness by his desire not to offend.

"You have n't thought well of this, Judith-" he said-"no, your feelin's are
awakened by all that has lately happened, and believin' yourself to be
without kindred in the world, you are in too great haste to find some to fill
the places of them that's lost."

"Were I living in a crowd of friends, Deerslayer, I should still think, as I
now think-say as I now say," returned Judith, speaking with her hands still
shading her lovely face.

"Thank you, gal- thank you, from the bottom of my heart. Howsever, I am not
one to take advantage of a weak moment, when you're forgetful of your own
great advantages, and fancy 'arth and all it holds, is in this little canoe.
No-no-Judith 'twould be onginerous in me; what you've offered can never come
to pass!"

"It all may be, and that without leaving cause of repentance to any-"
answered Judith, with an impetuosity of feeling and manner, that at once
unveiled her eyes. "We can cause the soldiers to leave our goods on the road,
till we return, when they can easily be brought back to the house; the lake
will be no more visited by the enemy, this war at least; all your skins may
be readily sold at the garrison; thereyou can buy the few necessaries we
shall want, for I wish never to see the spot, again; and Deerslayer," added
the girl smiling with a sweetness and nature that the young man found it hard
to resist-"as a proof how wholly I am and wish to be yours, - how completely
I desire to be nothing but your wife, the very first fire that we kindle,
after our return, shall be
lighted with the brocade dress, and fed by every article I have that you may
think unfit for the woman you wish to live with!"

"Ah's! me-you're a winning and a lovely creatur', Judith; yes, you are all
that, and no one can deny it, and speak truth. These pictur's are pleasant to
the thoughts, but they mightn't prove so happy as you now think 'em. Forget
it all, therefore, and let us paddle after the Sarpent and Hist, as if
nothing had been said on the subject."

Judith was deeply mortified, and, what is more, she was profoundly grieved.
Still there was a steadiness and quiet in the manner of Deerslayer that
completely smothered her hopes, and told her that for once, her exceeding
beauty had Failed to excite the admiration and homage it was wont to receive.
Women are said seldom to forgive those who slight their advances, but this
high spirited and impetuous girl entertained no shadow of resentment, then or
ever, against the fair lealing and ingenuous hunter. At the moment, the
prevailing Feeling was the wish to be certain that there was no
misunderstanding. After another painful pause, therefore, she brought the
matter to an issue by a question too direct to admit of equivocation.

"God forbid, that we lay up regrets, in after life, through my want of
sincerity now," she said. "I hope we understand each other, at least. You
will not accept me for a wife, Deer ;layer?"


"Tis better for both that I should n't take advantage of your own
forgetfulness, Judith. We can never marry."

"You do not love me, - cannot find it in your heart, perhaps, to esteem me,
Deerslayer!"


"Every thing in the way of fri'ndship, Judith-every thing, Even to sarvices
and life itself. Yes, I'd risk as much for you, at his moment, as I would
risk in behalf of Hist, and that is sayin' as much as I can say of any darter
of woman. I do not think I feel towards either-mind I say either, Judith-as
if I wished to quit father and mother- if father and mother was livin',
which, howsever, neither is-but if both was livin', I do not feel towards any
woman as if I wish'd to quit 'em in order to cleave unto her."


"This is enough!" answered Judith, in a rebuked and smothered voice-"!
understand all that you mean. Marry you cannot with loving, and that love you
do not feel for me. Make no answer, if I am right, for I shalll understand
your silence - That will be painful enough of itself."

Deerslayer obeyed her, and he made no reply. For more than a minute, the girl
riveted her bright eyes on him, as if to read his soul, while he was playing
with the water, like a corrected school boy. Then Judith, herself, dropped
the end of her paddle, and urged the canoe away fom the spot, with a movement
as reluctant as the feelings which controlled it. Deerslayer quietly aided
the effort, however, and they were soon on the trackless line taken by the
Delaware.

In their way to the point, not another syllable was exchanged between
Deerslayer and his fair companion. As Judith sat in the bow of the canoe, her
back was turned towards him, else it is probable the expression of her
countenance might have induced him to venture some soothing terms of
friendship and regard. Contrary to what would have been expected, resentment
was still absent, though the colour frequently changed, from the deep flush
of mortification to the paleness of disappointment.  Sorrow, deep, heart-felt
sorrow, however, was the predominant emotion, and this was betrayed in a
manner not to be mistaken.

As neither labored hard at the paddle, the ark had already arrived and the
soldiers had disembarked, before the canoe of the two loiterers reached the
point. Chingachgook had preceded it, and was already some distance in the
wood, at a spot, where the two trails, that to the garrison, and that to the
villages of the Delawares separated. The soldiers, too, had taken up their
line of march, first setting the Ark adrift again, with a reckless disregard
of its fate. All this Judith saw, but she heeded it not. The glimmerglass had
no longer any charms for her, and when she put her foot on the strand, she
immediately proceeded on the trail of the soldiers, without casting a single
glance behind her. Even Hist was passed unnoticed, that modest young creature
shrinking from the averted face of Judith, as if guilyy herself of some
wrongdoing.

"Wait you here, Sarpent," said Deerslayer as he followed in the footsteps of
the dejected beauty, while passing his friend - "I will just see Judith among
her parth, and come and j'ine you."

A hundred yards had hid the couple from those in front, as well as those in
their rear, when Judith turned, and spoke.

"This will do, Deerslayer," she said sadly-"! understand your kindness but
shall not need it. In a few minutes I shall reach the soldiers. As you cannot
go with me on the journey of life, I do not wish you to go further on this.
But, stop-before we part, I would ask you a single question. And I require of
you, as you fear God, and reverence the truth, not to deceive me in your
answer. I know you do not love another and I can see but one reason why you
cannot, will not love me. Tell me then, Deerslayer, -" The girl paused, the
words she was about to utter seeming to choke her. Then rallying all her
resolution, with a face that flushed and paled at every breath she drew, she
continued.

"Tell me then, Deerslayer, if any thing light of me, that Henry March has
said may not have influenced your feelings?"

Truth was the Deerslayer's polar star. He ever kept it in view, and it was
nearly impossible for him to avoid uttering it, even when prudence demanded
silence. Judith read his answer in his countenance, and with a heart nearly
broken by the consciousness of undue erring, she signed to him an adieu, and
buried herself in the woods. For some time Deerslayer was irresolute as to
his course; but, in the end, he retraced his steps, and joined the Delaware.
That night the three 'camped on the head waters of their own river, and the
succeeding evening they entered the village of the tribe, Chingachgook and
his betrothed in triumph; their companion honored and admired, but in a
sorrow that it required months of activity to remove.

The war that then had its rise was stirring and bloody. The Delaware chief
rose among his people, until his name was never mentioned without eulogiums,
while another Uncas, the last of his race, was added to the long line of
warriors who bore that distinguishing appellation. As for the Deerslayer,
under the sobriquet of Hawkeye, he made his fame spread far and near, until
the crack of his rifle became as terrible to the ears of the Mingos, as the
thunders of the Manitou. His services were soon required by the officers of
the crown, and he especially attached himself, in the field, to one in
particular, with whose after life, he had a close and important connection.

Fifteen years had passed away, ere it was in the power of the Deerslayer to
revisit the Glimmerglass. A peace had intervened, and it was on the eve of
another and still more important war, when he and his constant friend,
Chingachgook, were hastening to the forts to join their allies. A stripling
accompanied them, for Hist already slumbered beneath the pines of the
Delawares, and the three survivors had now become in separable. They reached
the lake just as the sun was setting. Here all was unchanged. The river still
rushed through its bower of trees; the little rock was washing away, by the
slow action of the waves, in the course of centuries, the mountains stood in
their native dress, dark, rich and mysterious, while the sheet glistened in
its solitude, a beautiful gem of the forest.

The following morning, the youth discovered one of the canoes drifted on the
shore, in a state of decay. A little labor put it in a state for service, and
they all embarked, with a desire to examine the place. All the points were
passed, and Chingachgook pointed out to his son, the spot where the Hurons
had first encamped, and the point whence he had succeeded in stealing his
bride. Here they even landed, but all traces of the former visit had
disappeared. Next they proceeded to the scene of the battle, and there they
found a few of the signs that linger around such localities. Wild beasts had
disinterred many of the bodies, and human bones were bleaching in the rains
of summer. Uncas regarded all with reverence and pity, though traditions were
already rousing his young mind to the ambition and sternness of a warrior.

From the point, the canoe took its way toward the shoal, where the remains of
the castle were still visible, a picturesque ruin. The storms of winter had
long since unroofed the house, and decay had eaten into the logs. All the
fastenings were un touched, but the seasons rioted in the place, as if in
mockery at the attempt to exclude them. The palisades were rotting, as were
the piles, and it was evident that a few more recurrences of winter, a few
more gales and tempests, would sweep all into the lake, and blot the building
from the face of that magnificent solitude. The graves could not be found.
Either the elements had obliterated their traces, or time had caused those
who looked for them, to forget their position.

The Ark was discovered stranded on the eastern shore, where it had long
before been driven with the prevalent northwest winds. It lay on the sandy
extremity of a long low point, that is situated about two miles from the
outlet, and which is itself fast disappearing before the action of the
elements. The scow was filled with water, the cabin unroofed, and the logs
were decaying. Some of its coarser furniture still remained, and the heart of
Deerslayer beat quick, as he found a ribband of Judith's fluttering from a
log. It recalled all her beauty, and we may add all her failings. Although
the girl had never touched his heart, the Hawkeye, for so we ought now to
call him, still retained a kind and sincere interest in her welfare. He tore
away the ribband, and knotted it to the stock of Killdeer, which had been the
gift of the girl herself.

A few miles farther up the lake, another of the canoes was discovered, and on
the point where the party finally landed, were found those which had been
left there upon the shore. That in which the present navigation was made, and
the one discovered on the eastern shore, had dropped through the decayed
floor of the castle, drifted past the falling palisades, and had been thrown
as waifs upon the beach.

From all these signs, it was probable the lake had not been visited, since
the occurrence of the final scene of our tale. Accident, or tradition, had
rendered it again, a spot sacred to nature, the frequent wars, and the feeble
population of the colonies, still confining the settlements within narrow
boundaries. Chingachgook and his friend left the spot with melancholy
feelings. It had been the region of their First War Path, and it carried back
the minds of both to scenes of tenderness, as well as to hours of triumph.
They held their way towards the Mohawk in silence, however, to rush into new
adventures, as stirring and as remarkable as those which had attended their
opening careers, on this lovely lake. At a later day, they returned to the
place, where the Indian found a grave.

Time and circumstances have drawn an impenetrable mystery around all else
connected with the Hutters. They lived, erred, died, and are forgotten. None
connected have felt sufficient interest in the disgraced and disgracing to
withdraw the veil, and a century is about to erase even the recollection of
their names. The history of crime is ever revolting, and it is fortunate that
few love to dwell on its incidents. The sins of the family have long since
been arraigned at the judgment seat of God, or are registered for the
terrible settlement of the last great day.

The same fate attended Judith. When Hawkeye reached the garrison on the
Mohawk he enquired anxiously after that lovely but misguided creature. None
knew her-even her person was no longer remembered. Other officers had, again
and again, succeeded the Warleys and Craigs and Grahams, though an old
sergeant of the garrison, who had lately come from England, was enabled to
tell our hero, that Sir Robert Warley lived on his paternal estates, and that
there was a lady of rare beauty in the Lodge, who had great influence over
him, though she did not bear his name. Whether this was Judith relapsed into
her early failing, or some other victim of the soldier's, Hawkeye never knew,
nor would it be pleasant or profitable to inquire. We live in a world of
transgressions and selfishness, and no pictures that represent us otherwise
can be true, though, happily, for human nature, gleamings of that pure spirit
in whose likeness man has been fashioned, are to be seen relieving its
deformities, and mitigating if not excusing its crimes.





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by Stephen Kerr renkerr@earthlink.net.
Edition 11 was corrected by Martin Robb (MartinRobb@ieee.org).



The Deerslayer

by James Fenimore Cooper




Chapter I.


"There is a pleasure in the pathless woods, There is a rapture on
the lonely shore.  There is society where none intrudes, By the deep
sea, and music in its roar : I love not man the less, but nature
more, From these our interviews, in which I steal From all I may
be, or have been before, To mingle with the universe, and feel What
I can ne'er express, yet cannot all conceal"

Childe Harold.

On the human imagination events produce the effects of time.  Thus,
he who has travelled far and seen much is apt to fancy that he has
lived long; and the history that most abounds in important incidents
soonest assumes the aspect of antiquity.  In no other way can
we account for the venerable air that is already gathering around
American annals.  When the mind reverts to the earliest days of
colonial history, the period seems remote and obscure, the thousand
changes that thicken along the links of recollections, throwing
back the origin of the nation to a day so distant as seemingly to
reach the mists of time; and yet four lives of ordinary duration
would suffice to transmit, from mouth to mouth, in the form of
tradition, all that civilized man has achieved within the limits
of the republic.  Although New York alone possesses a population
materially exceeding that of either of the four smallest kingdoms
of Europe, or materially exceeding that of the entire Swiss
Confederation, it is little more than two centuries since the Dutch
commenced their settlement, rescuing the region from the savage
state.  Thus, what seems venerable by an accumulation of changes
is reduced to familiarity when we come seriously to consider it
solely in connection with time.

This glance into the perspective of the past will prepare the reader
to look at the pictures we are about to sketch, with less surprise
than he might otherwise feel; and a few additional explanations may
carry him back in imagination to the precise condition of society
that we desire to delineate.  It is matter of history that the
settlements on the eastern shores of the Hudson, such as Claverack,
Kinderhook, and even Poughkeepsie, were not regarded as safe from
Indian incursions a century since; and there is still standing on
the banks of the same river, and within musket-shot of the wharves
of Albany, a residence of a younger branch of the Van Rensselaers,
that has loopholes constructed for defence against the same crafty
enemy, although it dates from a period scarcely so distant.  Other
similar memorials of the infancy of the country are to be found,
scattered through what is now deemed the very centre of American
civilization, affording the plainest proofs that all we possess of
security from invasion and hostile violence is the growth of but
little more than the time that is frequently fulfilled by a single
human life.

The incidents of this tale occurred between the years 1740 and I745,
when the settled portions of the colony of New York were confined
to the four Atlantic counties, a narrow belt of country on each
side of the Hudson, extending from its mouth to the falls near its
head, and to a few advanced "neighborhoods" on the Mohawk and the
Schoharie.  Broad belts of the virgin wilderness not only reached the
shores of the first river, but they even crossed it, stretching away
into New England, and affording forest covers to the noiseless moccasin
of the native warrior, as he trod the secret and bloody war-path.
A bird's-eye view of the whole region east of the Mississippi
must then have offered one vast expanse of woods, relieved by a
comparatively narrow fringe of cultivation along the sea, dotted
by the glittering surfaces of lakes, and intersected by the waving
lines of river.  In such a vast picture of solemn solitude, the
district of country we design to paint sinks into insignificance,
though we feel encouraged to proceed by the conviction that, with
slight and immaterial distinctions, he who succeeds in giving an
accurate idea of any portion of this wild region must necessarily
convey a tolerably correct notion of the whole.

Whatever may be the changes produced by man, the eternal round of
the seasons is unbroken.  Summer and winter, seed-time and harvest,
return in their stated order with a sublime precision, affording
to man one of the noblest of all the occasions he enjoys of proving
the high powers of his far-reaching mind, in compassing the laws
that control their exact uniformity, and in calculating their
never-ending revolutions.

Centuries of summer suns had warmed the tops of the same noble oaks
and pines, sending their heats even to the tenacious roots, when
voices were heard calling to each other, in the depths of a forest,
of which the leafy surface lay bathed in the brilliant light of a
cloudless day in June, while the trunks of the trees rose in gloomy
grandeur in the shades beneath.  The calls were in different tones,
evidently proceeding from two men who had lost their way, and
were searching in different directions for their path.  At length
a shout proclaimed success, and presently a man of gigantic mould
broke out of the tangled labyrinth of a small swamp, emerging into
an opening that appeared to have been formed partly by the ravages
of the wind, and partly by those of fire.  This little area, which
afforded a good view of the sky, although it was pretty well filled
with dead trees, lay on the side of one of the high hills, or low
mountains, into which nearly the whole surface of the adjacent
country was broken.

"Here is room to breathe in!  " exclaimed the liberated forester,
as soon as he found himself under a clear sky, shaking his huge
frame like a mastiff that has just escaped from a snowbank.  "Hurrah!
Deerslayer; here is daylight, at last, and yonder is the lake."

These words were scarcely uttered when the second forester dashed
aside the bushes of the swamp, and appeared in the area.  After
making a hurried adjustment of his arms and disordered dress, he
joined his companion, who had already begun his disposition for a
halt.

"Do you know this spot!" demanded the one called Deerslayer,"
or do you shout at the sight of the sun?  "

" Both, lad, both; I know the spot, and am not sorry to see
so useful a fri'nd as the sun.  Now we have got the p'ints of the
compass in our minds once more, and 't will be our own faults if
we let anything turn them topsy-turvy ag'in, as has just 'happened.
My name is not Hurry Harry, if this be not the very spot where
the land-hunters 'camped the last summer, and passed a week.  See
I yonder are the dead bushes of their bower, and here is the spring.
Much as I like the sun, boy, I've no occasion for it to tell me it
is noon; this stomach of mine is as good a time-piece as is to be
found in the colony, and it already p'ints to half-past twelve.
So open the wallet, and let us wind up for another six hours' run."

At this suggestion, both set themselves about making the preparations
necessary for their usual frugal but hearty meal.  We will profit
by this pause in the discourse to give the reader some idea of
the appearance of the men, each of whom is destined to enact no
insignificant part in our legend.

It would not have been easy to find a more noble specimen of
vigorous manhood than was offered in the person of him who called
himself Hurry Harry.  His real name was Henry March but the
frontiersmen having caught the practice of giving sobriquets from
the Indians, the appellation of Hurry was far oftener applied to
him than his proper designation, and not unfrequently he was termed
Hurry Skurry, a nickname he had obtained from a dashing, reckless
offhand manner, and a physical restlessness that kept him
so constantly on the move, as to cause him to be known along the
whole line of scattered habitations that lay between the province
and the Canadas.  The stature of Hurry Harry exceeded six feet four,
and being unusually well proportioned, his strength fully realized
the idea created by his gigantic frame.  The face did no discredit
to the rest of the man, for it was both good-humored and handsome.
His air was free, and though his manner necessarily partook of the
rudeness of a border life, the grandeur that pervaded so noble a
physique prevented it from becoming altogether vulgar.

Deerslayer, as Hurry called his companion, was a very different
person in appearance, as well as in character.  In stature he stood
about six feet in his moccasins, but his frame was comparatively
light and slender, showing muscles, however, that promised unusual
agility, if not unusual strength.  His face would have had little
to recommend it except youth, were it not for an expression that
seldom failed to win upon those who had leisure to examine it, and
to yield to the feeling of confidence it created.  This expression
was simply that of guileless truth, sustained by an earnestness of
purpose, and a sincerity of feeling, that rendered it remarkable.
At times this air of integrity seemed to be so simple as to awaken
the suspicion of a want of the usual means to discriminate between
artifice and truth; but few came in serious contact with the man,
without losing this distrust in respect for his opinions and motives.

Both these frontiersmen were still young, Hurry having reached the
age of six or eight and twenty, while Deerslayer was several years
his junior.  Their attire needs no par