our turn of mind, Hetty, and much as I
should have expected.  They tell me your sister is handsome--oncommon,
for a mortal; and beauty is apt to seek admiration."

"Did you never see Judith?" demanded the girl, with quick earnestness;
if you never have, go at once and look at her.  Even Hurry Harry
is n't more pleasant to look at though she is a woman, and he is
a man."

Deerslayer regarded the girl for a moment with concern.  Her
pale-face had flushed a little, and her eye, usually so mild and
serene, brightened as she spoke, in the way to betray the inward
impulses.

"Ay, Hurry Harry,"  he muttered to himself, as he walked through
the cabin towards the other end of the boat; "this comes of good
looks, if a light tongue has had no consarn in it.  It 's easy to
see which way that poor creatur's feelin's are leanin', whatever
may be the case with your Jude's."

But an interruption was put to the gallantry of Hurry, the coquetry
of his intros, the thoughts of Deerslayer, and the gentle feelings
of Hetty, by the sudden appearance of the canoe of the ark's owner,
in the narrow opening among the bushes that served as a sort of
moat to his position.  It would seem that Hutter, or Floating Tom,
as he was familiarly called by all the hunters who knew his habits,
recognized the canoe of Hurry, for he expressed no surprise at
finding him in the scow.  On the contrary, his reception was such
as to denote not only gratification, but a pleasure, mingled with
a little disappointment at his not having made his appearance some
days sooner.

"I looked for you last week," he said, in a half-grumbling,
half-welcoming manner; "and was disappointed uncommonly that you
didn't arrive.  There came a runner through, to warn all the trappers
and hunters that the colony and the Canadas were again in trouble;
and I felt lonesome, up in these mountains, with three scalps to
see to, and only one pair of hands to protect them."

"That 's reasonable," returned March; "and 't was feeling like a
parent.  No doubt, if I had two sucb darters as Judith and Hetty,
my exper'ence would tell the same story, though in gin'ral I am
just as well satisfied with having the nearest neighbor fifty miles
off, as when he is within call.''

"Notwithstanding, you didn' t choose to come into the wilderness
alone, now you knew that the Canada savages are likely to be
stirring," returned Hutter, giving a sort of distrustful, and at
the same time inquiring glance at Deerslayer.

"Why should I?  They say a bad companion, on a journey, helps to
shorten the path; and this young man I account to be a reasonably
good one.  This is Deerslayer, old Tom, a noted hunter among the
Delawares, and Christian-born, and Christian-edicated, too, like
you and me.  The lad is not parfect, perhaps, but there 's worse
men in the country that he came from, and it 's likely he 'll find
some that's no better, in this part of the world.  Should we have
occasion to defend our traps, and the territory, he 'll be useful
in feeding us all; for he 's a reg'lar dealer in ven'son."

"Young man, you are welcome," growled Tom, thrusting a hard, bony
hand towards the youth, as a pledge of his sincerity; "in such
times, a white face is a friend's, and I count on you as a support.
Children sometimes make a stout heart feeble, and these two daughters
of mine give me more concern than all my traps, and skins, and
rights in the country."

"That's nat'ral l" cried Hurry.  "Yes, Deerslayer, you and I don't
know it yet by experience; but, on the whole, I consider that as
nat'ral.  If we had darters, it 's more than probable we should
have some such feelin's; and I honor the man that owns 'em.  As
for Judith, old man, I enlist, at once, as her soldier, and here
is Deerslayer to help you to take care of Hetty."

"Many thanks to you, Master March," returned the beauty, in a full,
rich voice, and with an accuracy of intonation and utterance that
she shared in common with her sister, and which showed that she
had been better taught than her father's life and appearance would
give reason to expect.  "Many thanks to you; but Judith Hutter
has the spirit and the experience that will make her depend more
on herself than on good-looking rovers like you.  Should there be
need to face the savages, do you land with my father, instead of
burrowing in the huts, under the show of defending us females and-"

"Girl-- girl,"  interrupted the father, "quiet that glib tongue
of thine, and hear the truth.  There are savages on the lake shore
already, and no man can say how near to us they may be at this very
moment, or when we may hear more from them!"

"If this be true, Master Hutter," said Hurry, whose change of
countenance denoted how serious he deemed the information, though
it did not denote any unmanly alarm, "if this be true, your ark is
in a most misfortunate position, for, though the cover did deceive
Deerslayer and myself, it would hardly be overlooked by a full-blooded
Injin, who was out seriously in s' arch of scalps!"

"I think as you do, Hurry, and wish, with all my heart, we lay
anywhere else, at this moment, than in this narrow, crooked stream,
which has many advantages to hide in, but which is almost fatal to
them that are discovered.  The savages are near us, moreover, and
the difficulty is, to get out of the river without being shot down
like deer standing at a lick!"

"Are you sartain, Master Hutter, that the red-skins you dread are
ra'al Canadas?" asked Deerslayer, in a modest but earnest manner.
"Have you seen any, and can you describe their paint?"

"I have fallen in with the signs of their being in the neighborhood,
but have seen none of 'em.  I was down stream a mile or so, looking
to my traps, when I struck a fresh trail, crossing the corner of a
swamp, and moving northward.  The man had not passed an hour; and
I know'd it for an Indian footstep, by the size of the foot, and
the intoe, even before I found a worn moccasin, which its owner
had dropped as useless.  For that matter, I found the spot where
he halted to make a new one, which was only a few yards from the
place where he had dropped the old one."

"That does n't look much like a red-skin on the war path!" returned
the other, shaking his head.  "An exper'enced warrior, at least,
would have burned, or buried, or sunk in the river such signs of
his passage; and your trail is, quite likely, a peaceable trail.
But the moccasin may greatly relieve my mind, if you bethought you
of bringing it off.  I've come here to meet a young chief myself;
and his course would be much in the direction you've mentioned.
The trail may have been his'n."

"Hurry Harry, you 're well acquainted with this young man, I hope,
who has meetings with savages in a part of the country where he
has never been before?" demanded Hutter, in a tone and in a manner
that sufficiently indicated the motive of the question; these rude
beings seldom hesitating, on the score of delicacy, to betray their
feelings.  "Treachery is an Indian virtue; and the whites, that
live much in their tribes, soon catch their ways and practices."

"True- true as the Gospel, old Tom; but not personable to Deerslayer,
who 's a young man of truth, if he has no other ricommend.  I'll
answer for his honesty, whatever I may do for his valor in battle."

"I should like to know his errand in this strange quarter of the
country."

"That is soon told, Master Hutter," said the young man, with the
composure of one who kept a clean conscience.  "I think, moreover,
you've a right to ask it.  The father of two such darters,
who occupies a lake, after your fashion, has just the same right
to inquire into a stranger's business in his neighborhood, as the
colony would have to demand the reason why the Frenchers put more
rijiments than common along the lines.  No, no, I 'll not deny your
right to know why a stranger comes into your habitation or country,
in times as serious as these."

"If such is your way of thinking, friend, let me hear your story
without more words."

"'T is soon told, as I said afore; and shall be honestly told.  I
'm a young man, and, as yet, have never been on a war-path; but
no sooner did the news come among the Delawares, that wampum and
a hatchet were about to be sent in to the tribe, than they wished
me to go out among the people of my own color, and get the exact
state of things for 'em.  This I did, and, after delivering my
talk to the chiefs, on my return, I met an officer of the crown on
the Schoharie.  who had messages to send to some of the fri'ndly
tribes that live farther west.  This was thought a good occasion
for Chingachgook, a young chief who has never struck a foe, and
myself; to go on our first war path in company, and an app'intment
was made for us, by an old Delaware, to meet at the rock near the
foot of this lake.  I'll not deny that Chingachgook has another
object in view, but it has no consarn with any here, and is his
secret and not mine; therefore I'll say no more about it."

"'Tis something about a young woman," interrupted Judith hastily,
then laughing at her own impetuosity, and even having the grace
to colour a little, at the manner in which she had betrayed her
readiness to impute such a motive.  "If 'tis neither war, nor a
hunt, it must be love."

"Ay, it comes easy for the young and handsome, who hear so much
of them feelin's, to suppose that they lie at the bottom of most
proceedin's; but, on that head, I say nothin'.  Chingachgook is to
meet me at the rock, an hour afore sunset tomorrow evening, after
which we shall go our way together, molesting none but the king's
inimies, who are law fully our own.  Knowing Hurry of old, who
once trapped in our hunting grounds, and falling in with him on the
Schoharie, just as he was on the p'int of starting for his summer
ha'nts, we agreed to journey in company; not so much from fear of
the Mingos, as from good fellowship, and, as he says, to shorten
a long road."

"And you think the trail I saw may have been that of your friend,
ahead of his time?" said Hutter.

"That's my idee, which may be wrong, but which may be right.  If I
saw the moccasin, howsever, I could tell, in a minute, whether it
is made in the Delaware fashion, or not."

"Here it is, then," said the quick-witted Judith, who had already
gone to the canoe in quest of it.  "Tell us what it says; friend
or enemy.  You look honest, and I believe all you say, whatever
father may think."

"That's the way with you, Jude; forever finding out friends, where
I distrust foes," grumbled Tom: "but, speak out, young man, and
tell us what you think of the moccasin."

"That's not Delaware made," returned Deerslayer, examining the worn
and rejected covering for the foot with a cautious eye.  "I'm too
young on a war-path to be positive, but I should say that moccasin
has a northern look, and comes from beyond the Great Lakes."

"If such is the case, we ought not to lie here a minute longer
than is necessary," said Hutter, glancing through the leaves of
his cover, as if he already distrusted the presence of an enemy on
the opposite shore of the narrow and sinuous stream.  "It wants but
an hour or so of night, and to move in the dark will be impossible,
without making a noise that would betray us.  Did you hear the echo
of a piece in the mountains, half-an-hour since?"

"Yes, old man, and heard the piece itself," answered Hurry, who now
felt the indiscretion of which he had been guilty, "for the last
was fired from my own shoulder."

"I feared it came from the French Indians; still it may put them
on the look-out, and be a means of discovering us.  You did wrong
to fire in war-time, unless there was good occasion.

"So I begin to think myself, Uncle Tom; and yet, if a man can't
trust himself to let off his rifle in a wilderness that is a thousand
miles square, lest some inimy should hear it, where 's the use in
carrying one?"

Hutter now held a long consultation with his two guests, in which
the parties came to a true understanding of their situation.  He
explained the difficulty that would exist in attempting to get
the ark out of so swift and narrow a stream, in the dark, without
making a noise that could not fail to attract Indian ears.  Any
strollers in their vicinity would keep near the river or the lake;
but the former had swampy shores in many places, and was both so
crooked and so fringed with bushes, that it was quite possible to
move by daylight without incurring much danger of being seen.  More
was to be apprehended, perhaps, from the ear than from the eye,
especially as long as they were in the short, straitened, and
canopied reaches of the stream.

"I never drop down into this cover, which is handy to my traps,
and safer than the lake from curious eyes, without providing the
means of getting out ag'in," continued this singular being; "and
that is easier done by a pull than a push.  My anchor is now lying
above the suction, in the open lake; and here is a line, you see,
to haul us up to it.  Without some such help, a single pair of
bands would make heavy work in forcing a scow like this up stream.
I have a sort of a crab, too, that lightens the pull, on occasion.
Jude can use the oar astern as well as myself; and when we fear no
enemy, to get out of the river gives us but little trouble."

"What should we gain, Master Hutter, by changing the position?"
asked Deerslayer, with a good deal of earnestness; "this is a safe
cover, and a stout defence might be made from the inside of this
cabin.  I've never fou't unless in the way of tradition; but it
seems to me we might beat off twenty Mingos, with palisades like
them afore us."

"Ay, ay; you 've never fought except in traditions, that 's plain
enough, young man!  Did you ever see as broad a sheet of water as
this above us, before you came in upon it with Hurry?"

"I can't say that I ever did," Deerslayer answered, modestly.  "Youth
is the time to l'arn; and I 'm far from wishing to raise my voice
in counsel, afore it is justified by exper'ence."

"Well, then, I'll teach you the disadvantage of fighting in this
position, and the advantage of taking to the open lake.  Here,
you may see, the savages will know where to aim every shot; and it
would be too much to hope that some would not find their way through
the crevices of the logs.  Now, on the other hand, we should have
nothing but a forest to aim at.  Then we are not safe from fire,
here, the bark of this roof being little better than so much
kindling-wood.  The castle, too, might be entered and ransacked in
my absence, and all my possessions overrun and destroyed.  Once in
the lake, we can be attacked only in boats or on rafts- shall have
a fair chance with the enemy-and can protect the castle with the
ark.  Do you understand this reasoning, youngster?"

"It sounds well- yes, it has a rational sound; and I'll not gainsay
it."

"Well, old Tom," cried Hurry, "If we are to move, the sooner we
make a beginning, the sooner we shall know whether we are to have
our scalps for night-caps, or not."

As this proposition was self-evident, no one denied its justice.
The three men, after a short preliminary explanation, now set
about their preparations to move the ark in earnest.  The slight
fastenings were quickly loosened; and, by hauling on the line, the
heavy craft slowly emerged from the cover.  It was no sooner free
from the incumbrance of the branches, than it swung into the stream,
sheering quite close to the western shore, by the force of the
current.  Not a soul on board heard the rustling of the branches,
as the cabin came against the bushes and trees of the western bank,
without a feeling of uneasiness; for no one knew at what moment, or
in what place, a secret and murderous enemy might unmask himself.
Perhaps the gloomy light that still struggled through the impending
canopy of leaves, or found its way through the narrow, ribbon-like
opening, which seemed to mark, in the air above, the course of
the river that flowed beneath, aided in augmenting the appearance
of the danger; for it was little more than sufficient to render
objects visible, without giving up all their outlines at a glance.
Although the sun had not absolutely set, it had withdrawn its direct
rays from the valley; and the hues of evening were beginning to
gather around objects that stood uncovered, rendering those within
the shadows of the woods still more sombre and gloomy.

No interruption followed the movement, however, and, as the men
continued to haul on the line, the ark passed steadily ahead, the
great breadth of the scow preventing its sinking into the water,
and from offering much resistance to the progress of the swift
element beneath its bottom.  Hutter, too, had adopted a precaution
suggested by experience, which might have done credit to a seaman,
and which completely prevented any of the annoyances and obstacles
which otherwise would have attended the short turns of the river.
As the ark descended, heavy stones, attached to the line, were
dropped in the centre of the stream, forming local anchors, each
of which was kept from dragging by the assistance of those above
it, until the uppermost of all was reached, which got its "backing"
from the anchor, or grapnel, that lay well out in the lake.  In
consequence of this expedient, the ark floated clear of the
incumbrances of the shore, against which it would otherwise have
been unavoidably hauled at every turn, producing embarrassments
that Hutter, single-handed, would have found it very difficult to
overcome.  Favored by this foresight, and stimulated by the apprehension
of discovery, Floating Tom and his two athletic companions hauled
the ark ahead with quite as much rapidity as comported with the
strength of the line.  At every turn in the stream, a stone was
raised from the bottom, when the direction of the scow changed to
one that pointed towards the stone that lay above.  In this manner,
with the channel buoyed out for him, as a sailor might term it,
did Hutter move forward, occasionally urging his friends, in a low
and guarded voice, to increase their exertions, and then, as occasions
offered, warning them against efforts that might, at particular
moments, endanger all by too much zeal.  In spite of their long
familiarity with the woods, the gloomy character of the shaded river
added to the uneasiness that each felt; and when the ark reached
the first bend in the Susquehannah, and the eye caught a glimpse
of the broader expanse of the lake, all felt a relief, that perhaps
none would have been willing to confess.  Here the last stone
was raised from the bottom, and the line led directly towards the
grapnel, which, as Hutter had explained, was dropped above the
suction of the current.

"Thank God!" ejaculated Hurry, "there is daylight, and we shall
soon have a chance of seeing our inimies, if we are to feel 'em."

"That is more than you or any man can say," growled Hutter.
"There is no spot so likely to harbor a party as the shore around
the outlet, and the moment we clear these trees and get into
open water, will be the most trying time, since it will leave the
enemy a cover, while it puts us out of one.  Judith, girl, do you
and Hetty leave the oar to take care of itself; and go within the
cabin; and be mindful not to show your faces at a window; for they
who will look at them won't stop to praise their beauty.  And now,
Hurry, we 'll step into this outer room ourselves, and haul through
the door, where we shall all be safe, from a surprise, at least.
Friend Deerslayer, as the current is lighter, and the line has all
the strain on it that is prudent, do you keep moving from window
to window, taking care not to let your head be seen, if you set
any value on life.  No one knows when or where we shall hear from
our neighbors."

Deerslayer complied, with a sensation that had nothing in common
with fear, but which had all the interest of a perfectly novel and
a most exciting situation.  For the first time in his life he was
in the vicinity of enemies, or had good reason to think so; and
that, too, under all the thrilling circumstances of Indian surprises
and Indian artifices.  As he took his stand at the window, the ark
was just passing through the narrowest part of the stream, a point
where the water first entered what was properly termed the river,
and where the trees fairly interlocked overhead, causing the
current to rush into an arch of verdure; a feature as appropriate
and peculiar to the country, perhaps, as that of Switzerland, where
the rivers come rushing literally from chambers of ice.

The ark was in the act of passing the last curve of this leafy
entrance, as Deerslayer, having examined all that could be seen of
the eastern bank of the river, crossed the room to look from the
opposite window, at the western.  His arrival at this aperture was
most opportune, for he had no sooner placed his eye at a crack,
than a sight met his gaze that might well have alarmed a sentinel
so young and inexperienced.  A sapling overhung the water, in nearly
half a circle, having first grown towards the light, and then been
pressed down into this form by the weight of the snows; a circumstance
of common occurrence in the American woods.  On this no less than
six Indians had already appeared, others standing ready to follow
them, as they left room; each evidently bent on running out on the
trunk, and dropping on the roof of the ark as it passed beneath.  This
would have been an exploit of no great difficulty, the inclination
of the tree admitting of an easy passage, the adjoining branches
offering ample support for the hands, and the fall being too trifling
to be apprehended.  When Deerslayer first saw this party, it was
just unmasking itself, by ascending the part of the tree nearest to
the earth, or that which was much the most difficult to overcome;
and his knowledge of Indian habits told him at once that they were
all in their war-paint, and belonged to a hostile tribe.

"Pull, Hurry," he cried; " pull for your life, and as you love
Judith Hutter!  Pull, man, pull !"

This call was made to one that the young man knew had the strength
of a giant.  It was so earnest and solemn, that both Hutter and
March felt it was not idly given, and they applied all their force
to the line simultaneously, and at a most critical moment.  The scow
redoubled its motion, and seemed to glide from under the tree as
if conscious of the danger that was impending overhead.  Perceiving
that they were discovered, the Indians uttered the fearful war-whoop,
and running forward on the tree, leaped desperately towards their
fancied prize.  There were six on the tree, and each made the
effort.  All but their leader fell into the river more or less
distant from the ark, as they came, sooner or later, to the leaping
place.  The chief, who had taken the dangerous post in advance,
having an earlier opportunity than the others, struck the scow just
within the stern.  The fall proving so much greater than he had
anticipated, he was slightly stunned, and for a moment he remained
half bent and unconscious of his situation.  At this instant Judith
rushed from the cabin, her beauty heightened by the excitement that
produced the bold act, which flushed her cheek to crimson, and,
throwing all her strength into the effort, she pushed the intruder
over the edge of the scow, headlong into the river.  This decided
feat was no sooner accomplished than the woman resumed her sway;
Judith looked over the stern to ascertain what had become of the
man, and the expression of her eyes softened to concern, next, her
cheek crimsoned between shame and surprise at her own temerity,
and then she laughed in her own merry and sweet manner.  All this
occupied less than a minute, when the arm of Deerslayer was thrown
around her waist, and she was dragged swiftly within the protection
of the cabin.  This retreat was not effected too soon.  Scarcely
were the two in safety, when the forest was filled with yells, and
bullets began to patter against the logs.

The ark being in swift motion all this while, it was beyond the
danger of pursuit by the time these little events had occurred;
and the savages, as soon as the first burst of their anger had
subsided, ceased firing, with the consciousness that they were
expending their ammunition in vain.  When the scow came up over
her grapnel, Hutter tripped the latter in a way not to impede the
motion; and being now beyond the influence of the current, the vessel
continued to drift ahead, until fairly in the open lake, though
still near enough to the land to render exposure to a rifle-bullet
dangerous.  Hutter and March got out two small sweeps and, covered
by the cabin, they soon urged the ark far enough from the shore to
leave no inducement to their enemies to make any further attempt
to injure them.


Chapter V.


"Why, let the strucken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play, For
some must watch, while some must sleep, Thus runs the world away."

Hamlet, III.ii.271-74

Another consultation took place in the forward part of the scow, at
which both Judith and Hetty were present.  As no danger could now
approach unseen, immediate uneasiness had given place to the concern
which attended the conviction that enemies were in considerable
force on the shores of the lake, and that they might be sure
no practicable means of accomplishing their own destruction would
be neglected.  As a matter of course Hutter felt these truths the
deepest, his daughters having an habitual reliance on his resources,
and knowing too little to appreciate fully all the risks they ran;
while his male companions were at liberty to quit him at any moment
they saw fit.  His first remark showed that he had an eye to the
latter circumstance, and might have betrayed, to a keen observer,
the apprehension that was just then uppermost.

"We've a great advantage over the Iroquois, or the enemy, whoever
they are, in being afloat," he said.

"There 's not a canoe on the lake that I don't know where it 's
hid; and now yours is here.  Hurry, there are but three more on
the land, and they 're so snug in hollow logs that I don't believe
the Indians could find them, let them try ever so long."

"There's no telling that- no one can say that," put in Deerslayer;
"a hound is not more sartain on the scent than a red-skin, when
he expects to get anything by it.  Let this party see scalps afore
'em, or plunder, or honor accordin' to their idees of what honor
is, and 't will be a tight log that hides a canoe from their eyes."

"You're right, Deerslayer," cried Harry March; "you're downright
Gospel in this matter, and I rej'ice that my bunch of bark is safe
enough here, within reach of my arm.  I calcilate they'll be at
all the rest of the canoes afore to-morrow night, if they are in
ra'al 'arnest to smoke you out, old Tom, and we may as well overhaul
our paddles for a pull."

Hutter made no immediate reply.  He looked about him in silence
for quite a minute, examining the sky, the lake, and the belt of
forest which inclosed it, as it might be hermetically, like one
consulting their signs.  Nor did he find any alarming symptoms.
The boundless woods were sleeping in the deep repose of nature,
the heavens were placid, but still luminous with the light of the
retreating sun, while the lake looked more lovely and calm than
it had before done that day.  It was a scene altogether soothing,
and of a character to lull the passions into a species of holy
calm.  How far this effect was produced, however, on the party in
the ark, must appear in the progress of our narrative.

"Judith," called out the father, when he had taken this close but
short survey of the omens, "night is at hand; find our friends
food; a long march gives a sharp appetite."

"We're not starving, Master Hutter," March observed, "for we filled
up just as we reached the lake, and for one, I prefer the company
of Jude even to her supper.  This quiet evening is very agreeable
to sit by her side."

"Natur' is natur'," objected Hutter, "and must be fed.  Judith,
see to the meal, and take your sister to help you.  I've a little
discourse to hold with you, friends," he continued, as soon as his
daughters were out of hearing, "and wish the girls away.  You see
my situation, and I should like to hear your opinions concerning
what is best to be done.  Three times have I been burnt out already,
but that was on the shore; and I've considered myself as pretty
safe ever since I got the castle built, and the ark afloat.  My
other accidents, however, happened in peaceable times, being nothing
more than such flurries as a man must meet with, in the woods; but
this matter looks serious, and your ideas would greatly relieve my
mind."

"It's my notion, old Tom, that you, and your huts, and your traps,
and your whole possessions, hereaway, are in desperate jippardy,"
returned the matter-of-fact Hurry, who saw no use in concealment.
"Accordin' to my idees of valie, they 're altogether not worth half
as much today as they was yesterday, nor would I give more for 'em,
taking the pay in skins."

"Then I've children!" continued the father, making the allusion
in a way that it might have puzzled even an indifferent observer
to say was intended as a bait, or as an exclamation of paternal
concern, "daughters, as you know, Hurry, and good girls too, I may
say, though I am their father."

"A man may say anything, Master Hutter, particularly when pressed
by time and circumstances.  You've darters, as you say, and one
of them hasn't her equal on the frontiers for good looks, whatever
she may have for good behavior.  As for poor Hetty, she's Hetty
Hutter, and that's as much as one can say about the poor thing.
Give me Jude, if her conduct was only equal to her looks!"

"I see, Harry March, I can only count on you as a fair-weather
friend; and I suppose that your companion will be of the same way
of thinking," returned the other, with a slight show of pride,
that was not altogether without dignity; "well, I must depend on
Providence, which will not turn a deaf ear, perhaps, to a father's
prayers."

"If you've understood Hurry, here, to mean that he intends to desart
you," said Deerslayer, with an earnest simplicity that gave double
assurance of its truth, "I think you do him injustice, as I know
you do me, in supposing I would follow him, was he so ontrue-hearted
as to leave a family of his own color in such a strait as this.
I've come on this at take, Master Hutter, to rende'vous a fri'nd,
and I only wish he was here himself, as I make no doubt he will be
at sunset tomorrow, when you 'd have another rifle to aid you; an
inexper'enced one, I '11 allow, like my own, but one that has proved
true so often ag'in the game, big and little, that I ll answer for
its sarvice ag'in mortals."

May I depend on you to stand by me and my daughters, then, Deerslayer?"
demanded the old man, with a father's anxiety in his countenance.

"That may you, Floating Tom, if that's your name; and as a
brother would stand by a sister, a husband his wife, or a suitor
his sweetheart.  In this strait you may count on me, through all
advarsities; and I think Hurry does discredit to his natur' and
wishes, if you can't count on him."

"Not he," cried Judith, thrusting her handsome face out of the
door; "his nature is hurry, as well as his name, and he'll hurry
off, as soon as he thinks his fine figure in danger.  Neither 'old
Tom,' nor his 'gals,' will depend much on Master March, now they
know him, but you they will rely on, Deerslayer; for your honest face
and honest heart tell us that what you promise you will perform."

This was said, as much, perhaps, in affected scorn for Hurry, as
in sincerity.  Still, it was not said without feeling.  The fine
face of Judith sufficiently proved the latter circumstance; and if
the conscious March fancied that he had never seen in it a stronger
display of contempt- a feeling in which the beauty was apt to
indulge- than while she was looking at him, it certainly seldom
exhibited more of a womanly softness and sensibility, than when
her speaking blue eyes were turned on his travelling companion.

"Leave us, Judith," Hutter ordered sternly, before either of the
young men could reply; "leave us; and do not return until you come
with the venison and fish.  The girl has been spoilt by the flattery
of the officers, who sometimes find their way up here, Master March,
and you'll not think any harm of her silly words."

"You never said truer syllable, old Tom," retorted Hurry, who smarted
under Judith's observations; "the devil-tongued youngsters of the
garrison have proved her undoing!  I scarce know Jude any longer,
and shall soon take to admiring her sister, who is getting to be
much more to my fancy."

"I 'm glad to hear this, Harry, and look upon it as a sign that
you're coming to your right senses.  Hetty would make a much safer
and more rational companion than Jude, and would be much the most
likely to listen to your suit, as the officers have, I greatly
fear, unsettled her sister's mind."

"No man needs a safer wife than Hetty," said Hurry, laughing,
"though I'll not answer for her being of the most rational.  But
no matter; Deerslayer has not misconceived me, when he told you
I should be found at my post.  I'll not quit you, Uncle Tom, just
now, whatever may be my feelin's and intentions respecting your
eldest darter."

Hurry had a respectable reputation for prowess among his
associates, and Hutter heard this pledge with a satisfaction that
was not concealed.  Even the great personal strength of such an aid
became of moment, in moving the ark, as well as in the species of
hand-to-hand conflicts, that were not unfrequent in the woods; and
no commander who was hard pressed could feel more joy at hearing
of the arrival of reinforcements, than the borderer experienced at
being told this important auxiliary was not about to quit him.  A
minute before, Hutter would have been well content to compromise
his danger, by entering into a compact to act only on the defensive;
but no sooner did he feel some security on this point, than the
restlessness of man induced him to think of the means of carrying
the war into the enemy's country.

"High prices are offered for scalps on both sides." he observed,
with a grim smile, as if he felt the force of the inducement, at
the very time he wished to affect a superiority to earning money
by means that the ordinary feelings of those who aspire to be
civilized men repudiated, even while they were adopted.  "It isn't
right, perhaps, to take gold for human blood; and yet, when mankind
is busy in killing one another, there can be no great harm in adding
a little bit of skin to the plunder.  What's your sentiments, Hurry,
touching these p'ints?"

"That you've made a vast mistake, old man, in calling savage blood
human blood, at all.  I think no more of a red-skin's scalp than
I do of a pair of wolf's ears; and would just as lief finger money
for the one as for the other.  With white people 't is different,
for they've a nat'ral avarsion to being scalped; whereas your Indian
shaves his head in readiness for the knife, and leaves a lock of
hair by way of braggadocio, that one can lay hold of in the bargain."

"That's manly, however, and I felt from the first that we had only
to get you on our side, to have your heart and hand," returned
Tom, losing all his reserve, as he gained a renewed confidence in
the disposition of his companions.  "Something more may turn up from
this inroad of the red-skins than they bargained for.  Deerslayer,
I conclude you 're of Hurry's way of thinking, and look upon money
'arned in this way as being as likely to pass as money 'arned in
trapping or hunting."

"I've no such feelin', nor any wish to harbor it, not I," returned
the other.  "My gifts are not scalpers' gifts, but such as belong
to my religion and color.  I'll stand by you, old man, in the ark
or in the castle, the canoe or the woods, but I'll not unhumanize
my natur' by falling into ways that God intended for another race.
If you and Hurry have got any thoughts that lean towards the colony's
gold, go by yourselves in s'arch of it, and leave the females to
my care.  Much as I must differ from you both on all gifts that do
not properly belong to a white man, we shall agree that it is the
duty of the strong to take care of the weak, especially when the
last belong to them that natur' intended man to protect and console
by his gentleness and strength."

"Hurry Harry, that is a lesson you might learn and practise on to
some advantage," said the sweet, but spirited voice of Judith, from
the cabin; a proof that she had over-heard all that had hitherto
been said.

"No more of this, Jude," called out the father angrily.  "Move
farther off; we are about to talk of matters unfit for a woman to
listen to."

Hutter did not take any steps, however, to ascertain whether he
was obeyed or not; but dropping his voice a little, he pursued the
discourse.

"The young man is right, Hurry," he said; "and we can leave
the children in his care.  Now, my idea is just this; and I think
you'll agree that it is rational and correct.  There's a large party
of these savages on shore and, though I didn't tell it before the
girls, for they're womanish, and apt to be troublesome when anything
like real work is to be done, there's women among 'em.  This I
know from moccasin prints; and 't is likely they are hunters, after
all, who have been out so long that they know nothing of the war,
or of the bounties."

"In which case, old Tom, why was their first salute an attempt to
cut our throats?"

"We don't know that their design was so bloody.  It's natural and
easy for an Indian to fall into ambushes and surprises; and, no
doubt they wished to get on board the ark first, and to make their
conditions afterwards.  That a disapp'inted savage should fire at
us, is in rule; and I think nothing of that.  Besides, how often
they burned me out, and robbed my traps- ay, and pulled trigger on
me, in the most peaceful times?"

"The blackguards will do such things, I must allow; and we pay
'em off pretty much in their own c'ine.  Women would not be on the
war-path, sartainly; and, so far, there's reason in your idee."

"Nor would a hunter be in his war-paint," returned Deerslayer.  "I
saw the Mingos, and know that they are out on the trail of mortal
men; and not for beaver or deer."

"There you have it ag'in, old fellow," said Hurry.  "In the way of
an eye, now, I'd as soon trust this young man, as trust the oldest
settler in the colony; if he says paint, why paint it was."

"Then a hunting-party and a war-party have met, for women must have
been with 'em.  It's only a few days since the runner went through
with the tidings of the troubles; and it may be that warriors have
come out to call in their women and children, to get an early blow."

"That would stand the courts, and is just the truth cried Hurry;
"you've got it now, old Tom, and I should like to hear what you
mean to make out of it."

"The bounty," returned the other, looking up at his attentive
companion in a cool, sullen manner, in which, however, heartless
cupidity and indifference to the means were far more conspicuous
than any feelings of animosity or revenge.

"If there's women, there's children; and big and little have scalps;
the colony pays for all alike."

"More shame to it, that it should do so," interrupted Deerslayer;
"more shame to it, that it don't understand its gifts, and pay
greater attention to the will of God."

"Hearken to reason, lad, and don't cry out afore you understand a
case," returned the unmoved Hurry; "the savages scalp your fri'nds,
the Delawares, or Mohicans whichever they may be, among the rest;
and why shouldn't we scalp?  I will own, it would be ag'in right
for you and me now, to go into the settlements and bring out
scalps, but it's a very different matter as concerns Indians.  A
man shouldn't take scalps, if he isn't ready to be scalped, himself,
on fitting occasions.  One good turn desarves another, the world
over.  That's reason, and I believe it to be good religion."

"Ay, Master Hurry," again interrupted the rich voice of Judith,
"is it religion to say that one bad turn deserves another?"

"I'll never reason ag'in you, Judy, for you beat me with beauty,
if you can't with sense.  Here's the Canadas paying their Injins
for scalps, and why not we pay-"

"Our Indians !" exclaimed the girl, laughing with a sort of melancholy
merriment.  "Father, father!  think no more of this, and listen to
the advice of Deerslayer, who has a conscience; which is more than
I can say or think of Harry March."

Hutter now rose, and, entering the cabin, he compelled his daughters
to go into the adjoining room, when he secured both the doors,
and returned.  Then he and Hurry pursued the subject; but, as the
purport of all that was material in this discourse will appear in
the narrative, it need not be related here in detail.  The reader,
however, can have no difficulty in comprehending the morality that
presided over their conference.  It was, in truth, that which, in
some form or other, rules most of the acts of men, and in which
the controlling principle is that one wrong will justify another.
Their enemies paid for scalps, and this was sufficient to justify
the colony for retaliating.  It is true, the French used the same
argument, a circumstance, as Hurry took occasion to observe in
answer to one of Deerslayer's objections, that proved its truth,
as mortal enemies would not be likely to have recourse to the same
reason unless it were a good one.  But neither Hutter nor Hurry
was a man likely to stick at trifles in matters connected with the
right of the aborigines, since it is one of the consequences of
aggression that it hardens the conscience, as the only means of
quieting it.  In the most peaceable state of the country, a species
of warfare was carried on between the Indians, especially those of
the Canadas, and men of their caste; and the moment an actual and
recognized warfare existed, it was regarded as the means of lawfully
revenging a thousand wrongs, real and imaginary.  Then, again, there
was some truth, and a good deal of expediency, in the principle of
retaliation, of which they both availed themselves, in particular,
to answer the objections of their juster-minded and more scrupulous
companion.

"You must fight a man with his own we'pons, Deerslayer," cried Hurry,
in his uncouth dialect, and in his dogmatical manner of disposing
of all oral propositions; "if he's f'erce you must be f'ercer; if
he's stout of heart, you must be stouter.  This is the way to get
the better of Christian or savage: by keeping up to this trail,
you'll get soonest to the ind of your journey."

"That's not Moravian doctrine, which teaches that all are to be
judged according to their talents or l'arning; the Injin like an
Injin; and the white man like a white man.  Some of their teachers
say, that if you're struck on the cheek, it's a duty to turn the
other side of the face, and take another blow, instead of seeking
revenge, whereby I understand-"

"That's enough !" shouted Hurry; "that's all I want, to prove a
man's doctrine!  How long would it take to kick a man through the
colony- in at one ind and out at the other, on that principle?"

"Don't mistake me, March," returned the young hunter, with dignity;
"I don't understand by this any more than that it 's best to do
this, if possible.  Revenge is an Injin gift, and forgiveness a
white man's.  That's all.  Overlook all you can is what's meant;
and not revenge all you can.  As for kicking, Master Hurry," and
Deerslayer's sunburnt cheek flushed as he continued, "into the
colony, or out of the colony, that's neither here nor there, seeing
no one proposes it, and no one would be likely to put up with it.
What I wish to say is, that a red-skin's scalping don't justify a
pale-face's scalping."

"Do as you're done by, Deerslayer; that's ever the Christian parson's
doctrine."

"No, Hurry, I've asked the Moravians consarning that; and it's
altogether different.  'Do as you would be done by,' they tell me,
is the true saying, while men practyse the false.  They think all
the colonies wrong that offer bounties for scalps, and believe no
blessing will follow the measures.  Above all things, they forbid
revenge."

"That for your Moravians!" cried March, snapping his fingers; "they
're the next thing to Quakers; and if you'd believe all they tell
you, not even a 'rat would be skinned, out of marcy.  Who ever
heard of marcy on a muskrat!"

The disdainful manner of Hurry prevented a reply, and he and the
old man resumed the discussion of their plans in a more quiet and
confidential manner.  This confidence lasted until Judith appeared,
bearing the simple but savory supper.  March observed, with a little
surprise, that she placed the choicest bits before Deerslayer,
and that in the little nameless attentions it was in her power to
bestow, she quite obviously manifested a desire to let it be seen
that she deemed him the honored guest.  Accustomed, however, to
the waywardness and coquetry of the beauty, this discovery gave him
little concern, and he ate with an appetite that was in no degree
disturbed by any moral causes.  The easily-digested food of the
forests offering the fewest possible obstacles to the gratification
of this great animal indulgence, Deerslayer, notwithstanding the
hearty meal both had taken in the woods, was in no manner behind
his companion in doing justice to the viands.

An hour later the scene had greatly changed.  The lake was still
placid and glassy, but the gloom of the hour had succeeded to the
soft twilight of a summer evening, and all within the dark setting
of the woods lay in the quiet repose of night.  The forests gave
up no song, or cry, or even murmur, but looked down from the hills
on the lovely basin they encircled, in solemn stillness; and the
only sound that was audible was the regular dip of the sweeps, at
which Hurry and Deerslayer lazily pushed, impelling the ark towards
the castle.  Hutter had withdrawn to the stern of the scow, in
order to steer, but, finding that the young men kept even strokes,
and held the desired course by their own skill, he permitted the
oar to drag in the water, took a seat on the end of the vessel, and
lighted his pipe.  He had not been thus placed many minutes, ere
Hetty came stealthily out of the cabin, or house, as they usually
termed that part of the ark, and placed herself at his feet, on a
little bench that she brought with her.  As this movement was by
no means unusual in his feeble-minded child, the old man paid no
other attention to it than to lay his hand kindly on her head, in
an affectionate and approving manner; an act of grace that the girl
received in meek silence.

After a pause of several minutes, Hetty began to sing.  Her voice
was low and tremulous, but it was earnest and solemn.  The words
and the tune were of the simplest form, the first being a hymn
that she had been taught by her mother, and the last one of those
natural melodies that find favor with all classes, in every age,
coming from and being addressed to the feelings.  Hutter never
listened to this simple strain without finding his heart and manner
softened; facts that his daughter well knew, and by which she had
often profited, through the sort of holy instinct that enlightens
the weak of mind, more especially in their aims toward good.

Hetty's low, sweet tones had not been raised many moments, when
the dip of the oars ceased, and the holy strain arose singly on the
breathing silence of the wilderness.  As if she gathered courage
with the theme, her powers appeared to increase as she proceeded;
and though nothing vulgar or noisy mingled in her melody, its
strength and melancholy tenderness grew on the ear, until the air
was filled with this simple homage of a soul that seemed almost
spotless.  That the men forward were not indifferent to this
touching interruption, was proved by their inaction; nor did their
oars again dip until the last of the sweet sounds had actually died
among the remarkable shores, which, at that witching hour, would
waft even the lowest modulations of the human voice more than a mile.
Hutter was much affected; for rude as he was by early habits, and
even ruthless as he had got to be by long exposure to the practices
of the wilderness, his nature was of that fearful mixture of good
and evil that so generally enters into the moral composition of
man.

"You are sad tonight, child," said the father, whose manner and
language usually assumed some of the gentleness and elevation of
the civilized life he had led in youth, when he thus communed with
this particular child; "we have just escaped from enemies, and
ought rather to rejoice."

"You can never do it, father!" said Hetty, in a low, remonstrating
manner, taking his hard, knotty hand into both her own; "you have
talked long with Harry March; but neither of you have the heart to
do it!"

"This is going beyond your means, foolish child; you must have been
naughty enough to have listened, or you could know nothing of our
talk."

"Why should you and Hurry kill people- especially women and children?"

"Peace, girl, peace; we are at war, and must do to our enemies as
our enemies would do to us."

"That's not it, father!  I heard Deerslayer say how it was.  You
must do to your enemies as you wish your enemies would do to you.
No man wishes his enemies to kill him."

"We kill our enemies in war, girl, lest they should kill us.  One
side or the other must begin; and them that begin first, are most
apt to get the victory.  You know nothing about these things, poor
Hetty, and had best say nothing."

"Judith says it is wrong, father; and Judith has sense though I
have none."

"Jude understands better than to talk to me of these matters; for
she has sense, as you say, and knows I'll not bear it.  Which would
you prefer, Hetty; to have your own scalp taken, and sold to the
French, or that we should kill our enemies, and keep them from
harming us?"

"That's not it, father!  Don't kill them, nor let them kill us.
Sell your skins, and get more, if you can; but don't sell human
blood."

"Come, come, child; let us talk of matters you understand.  Are
you glad to see our old friend, March, back again?  You like Hurry,
and must know that one day he may be your brother- if not something
nearer."

"That can't be, father," returned the girl, after a considerable
pause; "Hurry has had one father, and one mother; and people never
have two."

"So much for your weak mind, Hetty.  When Jude marries, her
husband's father will be her father, and her husband's sister her
sister.  If she should marry Hurry, then he will be your brother."

"Judith will never have Hurry," returned the girl mildly.  but
positively; "Judith don't like Hurry."

"That's more than you can know, Hetty.  Harry March is the handsomest,
and the strongest, and the boldest young man that ever visits the
lake; and, as Jude is the greatest beauty, I don't see why they
shouldn't come together.  He has as much as promised that he will
enter into this job with me, on condition that I'll consent."

Hetty began to move her body back and forth, and other-wise to
express mental agitation; but she made no answer for more than a
minute.  Her father, accustomed to her manner, and suspecting no
immediate cause of concern, con-tinued to smoke with the apparent
phlegm which would seem to belong to that particular species of
enjoyment.

"Hurry is handsome, father," said Hetty, with a simple emphasis,
that she might have hesitated about using, had her mind been more
alive to the inferences of others.

"I told you so, child," muttered old Hutter, without removing the
pipe from between his teeth; "he's the likeliest youth in these
parts; and Jude is the likeliest young woman I've met with since
her poor mother was in her best days."

"Is it wicked to be ugly, father?'"

"One might be guilty of worse things- but you're by no means ugly;
though not so comely as Jude."

"Is Judith any happier for being so handsome?"

"She may be, child, and she may not be.  But talk of other matters
now, for you hardly understand these, poor Hetty.  How do you like
our new acquaintance, Deerslayer?"

"He isn't handsome, father.  Hurry is far handsomer than Deerslayer."

"That's true; but they say he is a noted hunter!  His fame