 had
reached me before I ever saw him; and I did hope he would prove to
be as stout a warrior as he is dexterous with the deer.  All men
are not alike, howsever, child; and it takes time, as I know by
experience, to give a man a true wilderness heart."

"Have I got a wilderness heart, father- and Hurry, is his heart
true wilderness?"

"You sometimes ask queer questions, Hetty!  Your heart is good,
child, and fitter for the settlements than for the woods; while
your reason is fitter for the woods than for the settlements."

"Why has Judith more reason than I, father?"

"Heaven help thee, child: this is more than I can answer.  God
gives sense, and appearance, and all these things; and he grants
them as he seeth fit.  Dost thou wish for more sense?"

"Not I.  The little I have troubles me; for when I think the hardest,
then I feel the unhappiest.  I don't believe thinking is good for
me, though I do wish I was as handsome as Judith!"

"Why so, poor child?  Thy sister's beauty may cause her trouble,
as it caused her mother before her.  It's no advantage, Hetty, to
be so marked for anything as to become an object of envy, or to be
sought after more than others."

"Mother was good, if she was handsome," returned the girl, the
tears starting to her eyes, as usually happened when she adverted
to her deceased parent.

Old Hutter, if not equally affected, was moody and silent at this
allusion to his wife.  He continued smoking, without appearing disposed
to make any answer, until his simple-minded daughter repeated her
remark, in a way to show that she felt uneasiness lest he might be
inclined to deny her assertion.  Then he knocked the ashes out of
his pipe, and laying his hand in a sort of rough kindness on the
girl's head, he made a reply.

"Thy mother was too good for this world," he said; "though others
might not think so.  Her good looks did not befriend her; and you
have no occasion to mourn that you are not as much like her as
your sister.  Think less of beauty, child, and more of your duty,
and you'll be as happy on this lake as you could be in the king's
palace."

"I know it, father; but Hurry says beauty is everything in a young
woman."

Hutter made an ejaculation expressive of dissatisfaction, and went
forward, passing through the house in order to do so.  Hetty's simple
betrayal of her weakness in behalf of March gave him uneasiness
on a subject concerning which he had never felt before, and he
determined to come to an explanation at once with his visitor; for
directness of speech and decision in conduct were two of the best
qualities of this rude being, in whom the seeds of a better education
seemed to be constantly struggling upwards, to be choked by the
fruits of a life in which his hard struggles for subsistence and
security had steeled his feelings and indurated his nature.  When
he reached the forward end of the scow, he manifested an intention
to relieve Deerslayer at the oar, directing the latter to take his
own place aft.  By these changes, the old man and Hurry were again
left alone, while the young hunter was transferred to the other
end of the ark.

Hetty had disappeared when Deerslayer reached his new post, and for
some little time he directed the course of the slow-moving craft by
himself.  It was not long, however, before Judith came out of the
cabin, as if disposed to do the honors of the place to a stranger
engaged in the service of her family.  The starlight was sufficient
to permit objects to be plainly distinguished when near at hand,
and the bright eyes of the girl had an expression of kindness in
them, when they met those of the youth, that the latter was easily
enabled to discover.  Her rich hair shaded her spirited and yet soft
countenance, even at that hour rendering it the more beautiful-as
the rose is loveliest when reposing amid the shadows and contrasts
of its native foliage.  Little ceremony is used in the intercourse
of the woods; and Judith had acquired a readiness of address, by
the admiration that she so generally excited, which, if it did not
amount to forwardness, certainly in no degree lent to her charms
the aid of that retiring modesty on which poets love to dwell.

"I thought I should have killed myself with laughing, Deerslayer,"
the beauty abruptly but coquettishly commenced, when I saw that
Indian dive into the river!  He was a good-looking savage, too,"
the girl always dwelt on personal beauty as a sort of merit, "and
yet one couldn't stop to consider whether his paint would stand
water!"

"And I thought they would have killed you with their we'pons,
Judith," returned Deerslayer; "it was an awful risk for a female
to run in the face of a dozen Mingos!"

"Did that make you come out of the cabin, in spite of their rifles,
too?" asked the girl, with more real interest than she would have
cared to betray, though with an indifference of manner that was
the result of a good deal of practice united to native readiness.

"Men ar'n't apt to see females in danger, and not come to their
assistance.  Even a Mingo knows that."

This sentiment was uttered with as much simplicity of manner
as of feeling, and Judith rewarded it with a smile so sweet, that
even Deerslayer, who had imbibed a prejudice against the girl in
consequence of Hurry's suspicions of her levity, felt its charm,
notwithstanding half its winning influence was lost in the feeble
light.  It at once created a sort of confidence between them, and
the discourse was continued on the part of the hunter, without
the lively consciousness of the character of this coquette of the
wilderness, with which it had certainly commenced.

"You are a man of deeds, and not of words, I see plainly, Deerslayer,"
continued the beauty, taking her seat near the spot where the other
stood, "and I foresee we shall be very good friends.  Hurry Harry
has a tongue, and, giant as he is, he talks more than he performs."

"March is your fri'nd, Judith; and fri'nds should be tender of each
other, when apart."

"We all know what Hurry's friendship comes to!  Let him have his
own way in everything, and he's the best fellow in the colony; but
'head him off,' as you say of the deer, and he is master of everything
near him but himself.  Hurry is no favorite of mine, Deerslayer;
and I dare say, if the truth was known, and his conversation about
me repeated, it would be found that he thinks no better of me than
I own I do of him."

The latter part of this speech was not uttered without uneasiness.
Had the girl's companion been more sophisticated, he might have
observed the averted face, the manner in which the pretty little
foot was agitated, and other signs that, for some unexplained
reason, the opinions of March were not quite as much a matter of
indifference to her as she thought fit to pretend.  Whether this
was no more than the ordinary working of female vanity, feeling
keenly even when it affected not to feel at all, or whether it
proceeded from that deeply-seated consciousness of right and wrong
which God himself has implanted in our breasts that we may know good
from evil, will be made more apparent to the reader as we proceed
in the tale.  Deerslayer felt embarrassed.  He well remembered the
cruel imputations left by March's distrust; and, while he did not
wish to injure his associate's suit by exciting resentment against
him, his tongue was one that literally knew no guile.  To answer
without saying more or less than he wished, was consequently a
delicate duty.

"March has his say of all things in natur', whether of fri'nd
or foe," slowly and cautiously rejoined the hunter.  "He's one of
them that speak as they feel while the tongue's a-going, and that's
sometimes different from what they'd speak if they took time to
consider.  Give me a Delaware, Judith, for one that reflects and
ruminates on his idees!  Inmity has made him thoughtful, and a
loose tongue is no ricommend at their council fires."

"I dare say March's tongue goes free enough when it gets on the
subject of Judith Hutter and her sister," said the girl, rousing
herself as if in careless disdain.  "Young women's good names are
a pleasant matter of discourse with some that wouldn't dare be so
open-mouthed if there was a brother in the way.  Master March may
find it pleasant to traduce us, but sooner or later he'll repent.

"Nay, Judith, this is taking the matter up too much in 'arnest.
Hurry has never whispered a syllable ag'in the good name of Hetty,
to begin with-"

"I see how it is- I see how it is," impetuously interrupted Judith.
"I am the one he sees fit to scorch with his withering tongue!
Hetty, indeed!  Poor Hetty!" she continued, her voice sinking into
low, husky tones, that seemed nearly to stifle her in the utterance;
"she is beyond and above his slanderous malice!  Poor Hetty!  If
God has created her feeble-minded, the weakness lies altogether on
the side of errors of which she seems to know nothing.  The earth
never held a purer being than Hetty Hutter, Deerslayer."

"I can believe it- yes, I can believe that, Judith, and I hope
'arnestly that the same can be said of her handsome sister."

There was a soothing sincerity in the voice of Deerslayer, which
touched the girl's feelings; nor did the allusion to her beauty
lessen the effect with one who only knew too well the power of her
personal charms.  Nevertheless, the still, small voice of conscience
was not hushed, and it prompted the answer which she made, after
giving herself time to reflect.

"I dare say Hurry had some of his vile hints about the people of
the garrisons," she added.  "He knows they are gentlemen, and can
never forgive any one for being what he feels he can never become
himself."

"Not in the sense of a king's officer, Judith, sartainly, for March
has no turn thataway; but in the sense of reality, why may not a
beaver-hunter be as respectable as a governor?  Since you speak of
it yourself, I'll not deny that he did complain of one as humble
as you being so much in the company of scarlet coats and silken
sashes.  But 't was jealousy that brought it out of him, and I
do think he mourned over his own thoughts as a mother would have
mourned over her child."

Perhaps Deerslayer was not aware of the full meaning that his
earnest language conveyed.  It is certain that he did not see the
color that crimsoned the whole of Judith's fine face, nor detect
the uncontrollable distress that immediately after changed its hue
to deadly paleness.  A minute or two elapsed in profound stillness,
the splash of the water seeming to occupy all the avenues of sound;
and then Judith arose, and grasped the hand of the hunter, almost
convulsively, with one of her own.

"Deerslayer," she said, hurriedly, "I'm glad the ice is broke between
us.  They say that sudden friendships lead to long enmities, but
I do not believe it will turn out so with us.  I know not how it
is-but you are the first man I ever met, who did not seem to wish
to flatter- to wish my ruin- to be an enemy in disguise- never mind;
say nothing to Hurry, and another time we'll talk together again."

As the girl released her grasp, she vanished in the house, leaving
the astonished young man standing at the steering-oar, as motionless
as one of the pines on the hills.  So abstracted, indeed, had his
thoughts become, that he was hailed by Hutter to keep the scow's head
in the right direction, before he remembered his actual situation.



Chapter VI.


"So spake the apostate Angel, though in pain, Vaunting aloud, but
racked with deep despair.'

Paradise lost, I.  125-26.

Shortly after the disappearance of Judith, a light southerly
air arose, and Hutter set a large square sail, that had once been
the flying top-sail of an Albany sloop, but which having become
threadbare in catching the breezes of Tappan, had been condemned
and sold.  He had a light, tough spar of tamarack that he could
raise on occasion, and with a little contrivance, his duck was spread
to the wind in a sufficiently professional manner.  The effect on
the ark was such as to supersede the necessity of rowing; and in
about two hours the castle was seen, in the darkness, rising out of
the water, at the distance of a hundred yards.  The sail was then
lowered, and by slow degrees the scow drifted up to the building,
and was secured.

No one had visited the house since Hurry and his companion left
it.  The place was found in the quiet of midnight, a sort of type
of the solitude of a wilderness.  As an enemy was known to be near,
Hutter directed his daughters to abstain from the use of lights,
luxuries in which they seldom indulged during the warm months, lest
they might prove beacons to direct their foes where they might be
found.

"In open daylight I shouldn't fear a host of savages behind these
stout logs, and they without any cover to skulk into," added Hutter,
when he had explained to his guests the reasons why he forbade the
use of light; "for I've three or four trusty weapons always loaded,
and Killdeer, in particular, is a piece that never misses.  But it's
a different thing at night.  A canoe might get upon us unseen, in
the dark; and the savages have so many cunning ways of attacking,
that I look upon it as bad enough to deal with 'em under a bright
sun.  I built this dwelling in order to have 'em at arm's length,
in case we should ever get to blows again.  Some people think
it's too open and exposed, but I'm for anchoring out here, clear
of underbrush and thickets, as the surest means of making a safe
berth."

"You was once a sailor, they tell me, old Tom?" said Hurry, in
his abrupt manner, struck by one or two expressions that the other
had just used, "and some people believe you could give us strange
accounts of inimies and shipwrecks, if you 'd a mind to come out
with all you know?"

"There are people in this world, Hurry," returned the other,
evasively, "who live on other men's thoughts; and some such often
find their way into the woods.  What I've been, or what I've seen
in youth, is of less matter now than what the savages are.  It's of
more account to find out what will happen in the next twenty-four
hours than to talk over what happened twenty-four years since."

"That's judgment, Deerslayer; yes, that's sound judgment.  Here's
Judith and Hetty to take care of, to say nothing of our own top-knots;
and, for my part, I can sleep as well in the dark as I could under
a noonday sun.  To me it's no great matter whether there is light
or not, to see to shut my eyes by."

As Deerslayer seldom thought it necessary to answer his companion's
peculiar vein of humor, and Hutter was evidently indisposed to dwell
longer on the subject, it's discussion ceased with this remark.  The
latter had something more on his mind, however, than recollections.
His daughters had no sooner left them, with an expressed intention
of going to bed, than he invited his two companions to follow him
again into the scow.  Here the old man opened his project, keeping
back the portion that he had reserved for execution by Hurry and
himself.

"The great object for people posted like ourselves is to command
the water," he commenced.  "So long as there is no other craft on
the lake, a bark canoe is as good as a man of-war, since the castle
will not be easily taken by swimming.  Now, there are but five
canoes remaining in these parts, two of which are mine, and one is
Hurry's.  These three we have with us here; one being fastened in
the canoe-dock beneath the house, and the other two being alongside
the scow.  The other canoes are housed on the shore, in hollow
logs, and the savages, who are such venomous enemies, will leave
no likely place unexamined in the morning, if they 're serious in
s'arch of bounties-"

"Now, friend Hutter," interrupted Hurry, "the Indian don't live that
can find a canoe that is suitably wintered.  I've done something
at this business before now, and Deerslayer here knows that I am
one that can hide a craft in such a way that I can't find it myself."

"Very true, Hurry," put in the person to whom the appeal had been
made, "but you overlook the sarcumstance that if you couldn't
see the trail of the man who did the job, I could.  I'm of Master
Hutter's mind, that it 's far wiser to mistrust a savage's ingenuity,
than to build any great expectations on his want of eye-sight.
If these two canoes can be got off to the castle, therefore, the
sooner it 's done the better."

"Will you be of the party that's to do it?" demanded Hutter, in a
way to show that the proposal both surprised and pleased him.

"Sartain.  I'm ready to enlist in any enterprise that's not ag'in
a white man's lawful gifts.  Natur' orders us to defend our lives,
and the lives of others, too, when there 's occasion and opportunity.
I'll follow you, Floating Tom, into the Mingo camp, on such an
arr'nd, and will strive to do my duty, should we come to blows;
though, never having been tried in battle, I don't like to promise
more than I may be able to perform.  We all know our wishes, but
none know their might till put to the proof."

"That's modest and suitable, lad," exclaimed Hurry.  "You've never
yet heard the crack of an angry rifle; and, let me tell you, 'tis
as different from the persuasion of one of your venison speeches,
as the laugh of Judith Hutter, in her best humor, is from the
scolding of a Dutch house keeper on the Mohawk.  I don't expect
you'll prove much of a warrior, Deerslayer, though your equal with
the bucks and the does don't exist in all these parts.  As for the
ra'al sarvice, however, you'll turn out rather rearward, according
to my consait."

"We'll see, Hurry, we'll see," returned the other, meekly; so far
as human eye could discover, not at all disturbed by these expressed
doubts concerning his conduct on a point on which men are sensitive,
precisely in the degree that they feel the consciousness of
demerit; "having never been tried, I'll wait to know, before I form
any opinion of myself; and then there'll be sartainty, instead of
bragging.  I've beard of them that was valiant afore the fight,
who did little in it; and of them that waited to know their own
tempers, and found that they weren't as bad as some expected, when
put to the proof."

"At any rate, we know you can use a paddle, young man," said Hutter,
"and that 's all we shall ask of you tonight.  Let us waste no more
time, but get into the canoe, and do, in place of talking."

As Hutter led the way, in the execution of his project, the boat
was soon ready, with Hurry and Deerslayer at the paddles.  Before
the old man embarked himself, however, he held a conference of
several minutes with Judith, entering the house for that purpose;
then, returning, he took his place in the canoe, which left the
side of the ark at the next instant.

Had there been a temple reared to God, in that solitary wilderness,
its clock would have told the hour of midnight as the party set
forth on their expedition.  The darkness had increased, though
the night was still clear, and the light of the stars sufficed for
all the purposes of the adventurers.  Hutter alone knew the places
where the canoes were hid, and he directed the course, while his
two athletic companions raised and dipped their paddles with proper
caution, lest the sound should be carried to the ears of their
enemies, across that sheet of placid water, in the stillness of
deep night.  But the bark was too light to require any extraordinary
efforts, and skill supplying the place of strength, in about half
an hour they were approaching the shore, at a point near a league
from the castle.

"Lay on your paddles, men," said Hutter, in a low voice, "and let
us look about us for a moment.  We must now be all eyes and ears,
for these vermin have noses like bloodhounds."

The shores of the lake were examined closely, in order to discover
any glimmering of light that might have been left in a camp; and the
men strained their eyes, in the obscurity, to see if some thread
of smoke was not still stealing along the mountainside, as it arose
from the dying embers of a fire.  Nothing unusual could be traced;
and as the position was at some distance from the outlet, or the
spot where the savages had been met, it was thought safe to land.
The paddles were plied again, and the bows of the canoe ground
upon the gravelly beach with a gentle motion, and a sound barely
audible.  Hutter and Hurry immediately landed, the former carrying
his own and his friend's rifle, leaving Deerslayer in charge of
the canoe.  The hollow log lay a little distance up the side of
the mountain, and the old man led the way towards it, using so much
caution as to stop at every third or fourth step, to listen if any
tread betrayed the presence of a foe.  The same death-like stillness,
however, reigned on the midnight scene, and the desired place was
reached without an occurrence to induce alarm.

"This is it," whispered Hutter, laying a foot on the trunk of a
fallen linden; "hand me the paddles first, and draw the boat out
with care, for the wretches may have left it for a bait, after
all."

"Keep my rifle handy, butt towards me, old fellow," answered March.
"If they attack me loaded, I shall want to unload the piece at 'em,
at least.  And feel if the pan is full."

"All's right," muttered the other; "move slow, when you get your
load, and let me lead the way."

The canoe was drawn out of the log with the utmost care, raised by
Hurry to his shoulder, and the two began to return to the shore,
moving but a step at a time, lest they should tumble down the
steep declivity.  The distance was not great, but the descent was
extremely difficult; and, towards the end of their little journey,
Deerslayer was obliged to land and meet them, in order to aid in
lifting the canoe through the bushes.  With his assistance the task
was successfully accomplished, and the light craft soon floated
by the side of the other canoe.  This was no sooner done, than
all three turned anxiously towards the forest and the mountain,
expecting an enemy to break out of the one, or to come rushing down
the other.  Still the silence was unbroken, and they all embarked
with the caution that had been used in coming ashore.

Hutter now steered broad off towards the centre of the lake.  Having
got a sufficient distance from the shore, he cast his prize loose,
knowing that it would drift slowly up the lake before the light
southerly air, and intending to find it on his return.  Thus relieved
of his tow, the old man held his way down the lake, steering towards
the very point where Hurry had made his fruitless attempt on the
life of the deer.  As the distance from this point to the outlet
was less than a mile, it was like entering an enemy's country; and
redoubled caution became necessary.  They reached the extremity
of the point, however, and landed in safety on the little gravelly
beach already mentioned.  Unlike the last place at which they had
gone ashore, here was no acclivity to ascend, the mountains looming
up in the darkness quite a quarter of a mile farther west, leaving
a margin of level ground between them and the strand.  The point
itself, though long, and covered with tall trees, was nearly flat,
and for some distance only a few yards in width.  Hutter and Hurry
landed as before, leaving their companion in charge of the boat.

In this instance, the dead tree that contained the canoe of which
they had come in quest lay about half-way between the extremity
of the narrow slip of land and the place where it joined the main
shore; and knowing that there was water so near him on his left,
the old man led the way along the eastern side of the belt with
some confidence walking boldly, though still with caution.  He had
landed at the point expressly to get a glimpse into the bay and
to make certain that the coast was clear; otherwise he would have
come ashore directly abreast of the hollow tree.  There was no
difficulty in finding the latter, from which the canoe was drawn
as before, and instead of carrying it down to the place where
Deerslayer lay, it was launched at the nearest favorable spot.  As
soon as it was in the water, Hurry entered it, and paddled round
to the point, whither Hutter also proceeded, following the beach.
As the three men had now in their possession all the boats on the
lake, their confidence was greatly increased, and there was no longer
the same feverish desire to quit the shore, or the same necessity
for extreme caution.  Their position on the extremity of the long,
narrow bit of land added to the feeling of security, as it permitted
an enemy to approach in only one direction, that in their front,
and under circumstances that would render discovery, with their
habitual vigilance, almost certain.  The three now landed together,
and stood grouped in consultation on the gravelly point.

"We've fairly tree'd the scamps," said Hurry, chuckling at their
success; "if they wish to visit the castle, let 'em wade or swim!
Old Tom, that idee of your'n, in burrowing out in the lake, was
high proof, and carries a fine bead.  There be men who would think
the land safer than the water; but, after all, reason shows it
isn't; the beaver, and rats, and other l'arned creatur's taking to
the last when hard pressed.  I call our position now, entrenched,
and set the Canadas at defiance."

"Let us paddle along this south shore," said Hutter, "and see if
there's no sign of an encampment; but, first, let me have a better
look into the bay, for no one has been far enough round the inner
shore of the point to make suit of that quarter yet."

As Hutter ceased speaking, all three moved in the direction he had
named.  Scarce had they fairly opened the bottom of the bay, when
a general start proved that their eyes had lighted on a common
object at the same instant.  It was no more than a dying brand,
giving out its flickering and failing light; but at that hour, and
in that place, it was at once as conspicuous as "a good deed in
a naughty world." There was not a shadow of doubt that this fire
had been kindled at an encampment of the Indians.  The situation,
sheltered from observation on all sides but one, and even on that
except for a very short distance, proved that more care had been
taken to conceal the spot than would be used for ordinary purposes,
and Hutter, who knew that a spring was near at hand, as well as
one of the best fishing-stations on the lake, immediately inferred
that this encampment contained the women and children of the party.

"That's not a warrior's encampment," he growled to Hurry; "and
there's bounty enough sleeping round that fire to make a heavy
division of head-money.  Send the lad to the canoes, for there'll
come no good of him in such an onset, and let us take the matter
in hand at once, like men."

"There 's judgment in your notion, old Tom, and I like it to the
backbone.  Deerslayer, do you get into the canoe, lad, and paddle
off into the lake with the spare one, and set it adrift, as we
did with the other; after which you can float along shore, as near
as you can get to the head of the bay, keeping outside the point,
howsever, and outside the rushes, too.  You can hear us when we
want you; and if there's any delay, I '11 call like a loon-yes,
that'll do it- the call of a loon shall be the signal.  If you hear
rifles, and feel like sogering, why, you may close in, and see if
you can make the same hand with the savages that you do with the
deer."

"If my wishes could be followed, this matter would not be undertaken,
Hurry-"

"Quite true-nobody denies it, boy; but your wishes can't be
followed; and that inds the matter.  So just canoe yourself off
into the middle of the lake, and by the time you get back there'11
be movements in that camp!"

The young man set about complying with great reluctance and a
heavy heart.  He knew the prejudices of the frontiermen too well,
however, to attempt a remonstrance.  The latter, indeed, under the
circumstances, might prove dangerous, as it would certainly prove
useless.  He paddled the canoe, therefore, silently and with the
former caution, to a spot near the centre of the placid sheet of
water, and set the boat just recovered adrift, to float towards the
castle, before the light southerly air.  This expedient had been
adopted, in both cases, under the certainty that the drift could
not carry the light barks more than a league or two, before the
return of light, when they might easily be overtaken In order to
prevent any wandering savage from using them, by swimming off and
getting possession, a possible but scarcely a probable event, all
the paddles were retained.

No sooner had he set the recovered canoe adrift, than Deerslayer
turned the bows of his own towards the point on the shore that had
been indicated by Hurry.  So light was the movement of the little
craft, and so steady the sweep of its master's arm, that ten minutes
had not elapsed ere it was again approaching the land, having, in
that brief time, passed over fully half a mile of distance.  As
soon as Deerslayer's eye caught a glimpse of the rushes, of which
there were many growing in the water a hundred feet from the
shore, he arrested the motion of the canoe, and anchored his boat
by holding fast to the delicate but tenacious stem of one of the
drooping plants.  Here he remained, awaiting, with an intensity of
suspense that can be easily imagined, the result of the hazardous
enterprise.

It would be difficult to convey to the minds of those who have
never witnessed it, the sublimity that characterizes the silence of
a solitude as deep as that which now reigned over the Glimmerglass.
In the present instance, this sublimity was increased by the gloom
of night, which threw its shadowy and fantastic forms around the
lake, the forest, and the hills.  It is not easy, indeed, to conceive
of any place more favorable to heighten these natural impressions,
than that Deerslayer now occupied.  The size of the lake brought
all within the reach of human senses, while it displayed so much
of the imposing scene at a single view, giving up, as it might be,
at a glance, a sufficiency to produce the deepest impressions.  As
has been said, this was the first lake Deerslayer had ever seen.
Hitherto, his experience had been limited to the courses of rivers
and smaller streams, and never before had he seen so much of
that wilderness, which he so well loved, spread before his gaze.
Accustomed to the forest, however, his mind was capable of portraying
all its hidden mysteries, as he looked upon its leafy surface.  This
was also the first time he had been on a trail where human lives
depended on the issue.  His ears had often drunk in the traditions
of frontier warfare, but he had never yet been confronted with an
enemy.

The reader will readily understand, therefore, how intense must have
been the expectation of the young man, as be sat in his solitary
canoe, endeavoring to catch the smallest sound that might denote
the course of things on shore.  His training had been perfect, so
far as theory could go, and his self-possession, notwithstanding
the high excitement, that was the fruit of novelty, would have
done credit to a veteran.  The visible evidences of the existence
of the camp, or of the fire could not be detected from the spot
where the canoe lay, and he was compelled to depend on the sense of
hearing alone.  He did not feel impatient, for the lessons he had
heard taught him the virtue of patience, and, most of all, inculcated
the necessity of wariness in conducting any covert assault on the
Indians.  Once he thought he heard the cracking of a dried twig, but
expectation was so intense it might mislead him.  In this manner
minute after minute passed, until the whole time since he left
his companions was extended to quite an hour.  Deerslayer knew not
whether to rejoice in or to mourn over this cautious delay, for,
if it augured security to his associates, it foretold destruction
to the feeble and innocent.

It might have been an hour and a half after his companions and he
had parted, when Deerslayer was aroused by a sound that filled him
equally with concern and surprise.  The quavering call of a loon
arose from the opposite side of the lake, evidently at no great
distance from its outlet.  There was no mistaking the note of
this bird, which is so familiar to all who know the sounds of the
American lakes.  Shrill, tremulous, loud, and sufficiently prolonged,
it seems the very cry of warning.  It is often raised, also, at
night, an exception to the habits of most of the other feathered
inmates of the wilderness; a circumstance which had induced Hurry
to select it as his own signal.  There had been sufficient time,
certainly, for the two adventurers to make their way by land from
the point where they had been left to that whence the call had come,
but it was not probable that they would adopt such a course.  Had
the camp been deserted they would have summoned Deerslayer to the
shore, and, did it prove to be peopled, there could be no sufficient
motive for circling it, in order to re-embark at so great a
distance.  Should he obey the signal, and be drawn away from the
landing, the lives of those who depended on him might be the forfeit-
and, should he neglect the call, on the supposition that it had been
really made, the consequences might be equally disastrous, though
from a different cause.  In this indecision he waited, trusting that
the call, whether feigned or natural, would be speedily renewed.
Nor was he mistaken.  A very few minutes elapsed before the same
shrill warning cry was repeated, and from the same part of the
lake.  This time, being on the alert, his senses were not deceived.
Although he had often heard admirable imitations of this bird, and
was no mean adept himself in raising its notes, he felt satisfied
that Hurry, to whose efforts in that way he had attended, could
never so completely and closely follow nature.  He determined,
therefore, to disregard that cry, and to wait for one less perfect
and nearer at hand.

Deerslayer had hardly come to this determination, when the profound
stillness of night and solitude was broken by a cry so startling,
as to drive all recollection of the more melancholy call of the
loon from the listener's mind.  It was a shriek of agony, that came
either from one of the female sex, or from a boy so young as not yet
to have attained a manly voice.  This appeal could not be mistaken.
Heart rending terror- if not writhing agony- was in the sounds, and
the anguish that had awakened them was as sudden as it was fearful.
The young man released his hold of the rush, and dashed his paddle
into the water; to do, he knew not what- to steer, he knew not
whither.  A very few moments, however, removed his indecision.  The
breaking of branches, the cracking of dried sticks, and the fall
of feet were distinctly audible; the sounds appearing to approach
the water though in a direction that led diagonally towards the
shore, and a little farther north than the spot that Deerslayer
had been ordered to keep near.  Following this clue, the young man
urged the canoe ahead, paying but little attention to the manner
in which he might betray its presence.  He had reached a part of
the shore, where its immediate bank was tolerably high and quite
steep.  Men were evidently threshing through the bushes and trees
on the summit of this bank, following the line of the shore, as if
those who fled sought a favorable place for descending.  Just at
this instant five or six rifles flashed, and the opposite hills
gave back, as usual, the sharp reports in prolonged rolling echoes.
One or two shrieks, like those which escape the bravest when suddenly
overcome by unexpected anguish and alarm, followed; and then the
threshing among the bushes was renewed, in a way to show that man
was grappling with man.

"Slippery devil!" shouted Hurry with the fury of disappointment-"his
skin's greased!  I sha'n't grapple!  Take that for your cunning!"

The words were followed by the fall of some heavy object among
the smaller trees that fringed the bank, appearing to Deerslayer
as if his gigantic associate had hurled an enemy from him in this
unceremonious manner.  Again the flight and pursuit were renewed,
and then the young man saw a human form break down the hill, and
rush several yards into the water.  At this critical moment the
canoe was just near enough to the spot to allow this movement,
which was accompanied by no little noise, to be seen, and feeling
that there he must take in his companion, if anywhere, Deerslayer
urged the canoe forward to the rescue.  His paddle had not been
raised twice, when the voice of Hurry was heard filling the air with
imprecations, and he rolled on the narrow beach, literally loaded
down with enemies.  While prostrate, and almost smothered with his
foes, the athletic frontierman gave his loon-call, in a manner that
would have excited laughter under circumstances less terrific.  The
figure in the water seemed suddenly to repent his own flight, and
rushed to the shore to aid his companion, but was met and immediately
overpowered by half a dozen fresh pursuers, who, just then, came
leaping down the bank.

"Let up, you painted riptyles- let up!" cried Hurry, too hard pressed
to be particular about the terms he used; "isn't it enough that I
am withed like a saw-log that ye must choke too!"

This speech satisfied Deerslayer that his friends were prisoners,
and that to land would be to share their fate He was already within
a hundred feet of the shore, when a few timely strokes of the paddle
not only arrested his advance, but forced him off to six or eight
times that distance from his enemies.  Luckily for him, all of the
Indians had dropped their rifles in the pursuit, or this retreat
might not have been effected with impunity; though no one had noted
the canoe in the first confusion of the melee.

"Keep off the land, lad," called out Hutter; "the girls depend
only on you, now; you will want all your caution to escape these
savages.  Keep off, and God prosper you, as you aid my children!"

There was little sympathy in general between Hutter and the young
man, but the bodily and mental anguish with which this appeal was
made served at the moment to conceal from the latter the former's
faults.  He saw only the father in his sufferings, and resolved
at once to give a pledge of fidelity to its interests, and to be
faithful to his word.

"Put your heart at ease, Master Hutter," he called out; "the gals
shall be looked to, as well as the castle.  The inimy has got the
shore, 'tis no use to deny, but he hasn't got the water.  Providence
has the charge of all, and no one can say what will come of it;
but, if good-will can sarve you and your'n, depend on that much.
My exper'ence is small, but my will is good."

"Ay, ay, Deerslayer," returned Hurry, in this stentorian voice,
which was losing some of its heartiness, notwithstanding,- "Ay, ay,
Deerslayer.  you mean well enough, but what can you do?  You're no
great matter in the best of times, and such a person is not likely
to turn out a miracle in the worst.  If there's one savage on this
lake shore, there's forty, and that's an army you ar'n't the man to
overcome.  The best way, in my judgment, will be to make a straight
course to the castle; get the gals into the canoe, with a few
eatables; then strike off for the corner of the lake where we came
in, and take the best trail for the Mohawk.  These devils won't
know where to look for you for some hours, and if they did, and
went off hot in the pursuit, they must turn either the foot or the
head of the lake to get at you.  That's my judgment in the matter;
and if old Tom here wishes to make his last will and testament in
a manner favorable to his darters, he'll say the same."

"'Twill never do, young man," rejoined Hutter.  "The enemy has
scouts out at this moment, looking for canoes, and you'll be seen
and taken.  Trust to the castle; and above all things, keep clear
of the land.  Hold out a week, and parties from the garrisons will
drive the savages off."

"'Twon't be four-and-twenty hours, old fellow, afore these foxes
will be rafting off to storm your castle," interrupted Hurry, with
more of the heat of argument than might be expected from a man who
was bound and a captive, and about whom nothing could be called free
but his opinions and his tongue.  "Your advice has a stout sound,
but it will have a fatal tarmination.  If you or I was in the
house, we might hold out a few days, but remember that this lad has
never seen an inimy afore tonight, and is what you yourself called
settlement-conscienced; though for my part, I think the consciences
in the settlements pretty much the same as they are out here in
the woods.  These savages are making signs, Deerslayer, for me to
encourage you to come ashore with the canoe; but that I'll never
do, as it's ag'in reason and natur'.  As for old Tom and myself,
whether they'll scalp us tonight, keep us for the torture by fire,
or carry us to Canada, is more than any one knows but the devil
that advises them how to act.  I've such a big and bushy head that
it's quite likely they'll indivor to get two scalps off it, for the
bounty is a tempting thing, or old Tom and I wouldn't be in this
scrape.  Ay- there they go with their signs ag'in, but if I advise
you to land may they eat me as well as roast me.  No, no, Deerslayer
-- do you keep off where you are, and after daylight, on no account
come within two hundred yards -"

This injunction of Hurry's was stopped by a hand being rudely
slapped against his mouth, the certain sign that some one in the
party sufficiently understood English to have at length detected
the drift of his discourse.  Immediately after, the whole group
entered the forest, Hutter and Hurry apparently making no resistance
to the movement.  Just as the sounds of the cracking bushes were
ceasing, however, the voice of the father was again heard.

"As you're true to my children, God prosper you, young man!" were
the words that reached Deerslayer's ears; after which he found
himself left to follow the dictates of his own discretion.

Several minutes elapsed, in death-like stillness, when the party
on the shore had disappeared in the woods.  Owing to the distance
-rather more than two hundred yards - and the obscurity, Deerslayer
had been able barely to distinguish the group, and to see it
retiring; but even this dim connection with human forms gave an
animation to the scene that was strongly in contrast to the abolute
solitude that remained.  Although the young man leaned forward
to listen, holding his breath and condensing every faculty in the
single sense of hearing, not another sound reached his ears to denote
the vicinity of human beings.  It seemed as if a silence that had
never been broken reigned on the spot again; and, for an instant,
even that piercing shriek, which had so lately broken the stillness
of the forest, or the execrations of March, would have been a relief
to the feeling of desertion to which it gave rise.

This paralysis of mind and body, however, could not last long in
one constituted mentally and physically like Deerslayer.  Dropping
his paddle into the water, he turned the head of the canoe, and
proceeded slowly, as one walks who thinks intently, towards the
centre of the lake.  When he believed himself to have reached a
point in a line with that where he had set the last canoe adrift,
he changed his direction northward, keeping the light air as nearly
on his back as possible.  After paddling a quarter of a mile in
this direction, a dark object became visible on the lake, a little
to the right; and turning on one side for the purpose, he had soon
secured his lost prize to his own boat.  Deerslayer now examined
the heavens, the course of the air, and the position of the two
canoes.  Finding nothing in either to induce a change of plan, he
lay down, and prepared to catch a few hours' sleep, that the morrow
might find him equal to its exigencies.

Although the hardy and the tired sleep profoundly, even in scenes
of danger, it was some time before Deerslayer lost his recollection.
His mind dwelt on what had passed, and his half-conscious faculties
kept figuring the events of the night, in a sort of waking
dream.  Suddenly he was up and alert, for he fancied he heard the
preconcerted signal of Hurry summoning him to the shore.  But all
was still as the grave again.  The canoes were slowly drifting
northward, the thoughtful stars were glimmering in their mild glory
over his head, and the forest-bound sheet of water lay embedded
between its mountains, as calm and melancholy as if never troubled
by the winds, or brightened by a noonday sun.  Once more the loon
raised his tremulous cry, near the foot of the lake, and the mystery
of the alarm was explained.  Deerslayer adjusted his hard pillow,
stretched his form in the bottom of the canoe, and slept.



Chapter VII.


"Clear, placid Leman I Thy contrasted lake With the wild world I
dwelt in, is a thing Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring.  This quiet sail is
as a noiseless wing To waft me from distraction; once I loved Torn
ocean's roar, but thy soft murmuring Sounds sweet as if a sister's
voice reproved, That I with stern delights should e'er have been
so moved."

BYRON.

Day had fairly dawned before the young man, whom we have left in
the situation described in the last chapter, again opened his eyes.
This was no sooner done, than he started up, and looked about
him with the eagerness of one who suddenly felt the importance of
accurately ascertaining his precise position.  His rest had been
deep and undisturbed; and when he awoke, it was with a clearness of
intellect and a readiness of resources that were very much needed
at that particular moment.  The sun had not risen, it is true, but
the vault of heaven was rich with the winning softness that "brings
and shuts the day," while the whole air was filled with the carols
of birds, the hymns of the feathered tribe.  These sounds first told
Deerslayer the risks he ran.  The air, for wind it could scarce be
called, was still light, it is true, but it had increased a little
in the course of the night, and as the canoes were feathers on
the water, they had drifted twice the expected distance; and, what
was still more dangerous, had approached so near the base of the
mountain that here rose precipitously from the eastern shore, as
to render the carols of the birds plainly audible.  This was not
the worst.  The third canoe had taken the same direction, and was
slowly drifting towards a point where it must inevitably touch,
unless turned aside by a shift of wind, or human hands.  In other
respects, nothing presented itself to attract attention, or to
awaken alarm.  The castle stood on its shoal, nearly abreast of
the canoes, for the drift had amounted to miles in the course of
the night, and the ark lay fastened to its piles, as both had been
left so many hours before.

As a matter of course, Deerslayer's attention was first given to
the canoe ahead.  It was already quite near the point, and a very
few strokes of the paddle sufficed to tell him that it must touch
before he could possibly overtake it.  Just at this moment, too,
the wind inopportunely freshened, rendering the drift of the light
craft much more rapid than certain.  Feeling the impossibility of
preventing a contact with the land, the young man wisely determined
not to heat himself with unnecessary exertions; but first looking
to the priming of his piece, he proceeded slowly and warily towards
the point, taking care to make a little circuit, that he might be
exposed on only one side, as he approached.

The canoe adrift being directed by no such intelligence, pursued
its proper way, and grounded on a small sunken rock, at the distance
of three or four yards from the shore.  Just at that moment, Deerslayer
had got abreast of the point, and turned the bows of his own boat
to the land; first casting loose his tow, that his movements might
be unencumbered.  The canoe hung an instant to the rock; then it
rose a hair's breadth on an almost imperceptible swell of the water,
swung round, floated clear, and reached the strand.  All this the
young man noted, but it neither quickened his pulses, nor hastened
his hand.  If any one had been lying in wait for the arrival of
the waif, he must be seen, and the utmost caution in approaching
the shore became indispensable; if no one was in ambush, hurry was
unnecessary.  The point being nearly diagonally opposite to the
Indian encampment, he hoped the last, though the former was not
only possible, but probable; for the savages were prompt in adopting
all the expedients of their particular modes of warfare, and quite
likely had many scouts searching the shores for craft to carry
them off to the castle.  As a glance at the lake from any height or
projection would expose the smallest object on its surface, there
was little hope that either of the canoes would pass unseen; and
Indian sagacity needed no instruction to tell which way a boat or
a log would drift, when the direction of the wind was known.  As
Deerslayer drew nearer and nearer to the land, the stroke of his
paddle grew slower, his eye became more watchful, and his ears
and nostrils almost dilated with the effort to detect any lurking
danger.  'T was a trying moment for a novice, nor was there the
encouragement which even the timid sometimes feel, when conscious
of being observed and commended.  He was entirely alone, thrown on
his own resources, and was cheered by no friendly eye, emboldened
by no encouraging voice.  Notwithstanding all these circumstances,
the most experienced veteran in forest warfare could not have
behaved better.  Equally free from recklessness and hesitation,
his advance was marked by a sort of philosophical prudence that
appeared to render him superior to all motives but those which were
best calculated to effect his purpose.  Such was the commencement
of a career in forest exploits, that afterwards rendered this man,
in his way, and under the limits of his habits and opportunities,
as renowned as many a hero whose name has adorned the pages of
works more celebrated than legends simple as ours can ever become.

When about a hundred yards from the shore, Deerslayer rose in the
canoe, gave three or four vigorous strokes with the paddle, sufficient
of themselves to impel the bark to land, and then quickly laying
aside the instrument of labor, he seized that of war.  He was in
the very act of raising the rifle, when a sharp report was followed
by the buzz of a bullet that passed so near his body as to cause
him involuntarily to start.  The next instant Deerslayer staggered,
and fell his whole length in the bottom of the canoe.  A yell -
it came from a single voice - followed, and an Indian leaped from
the bushes upon the open area of the point, bounding towards the
canoe.  This was the moment the young man desired.  He rose on the
instant, and levelled his own rifle at his uncovered foe; but his
finger hesitated about pulling the trigger on one whom he held at
such a disadvantage.  This little delay, probably, saved the life
of the Indian, who bounded back into the cover as swiftly as he
had broken out of it.  In the meantime Deerslayer had been swiftly
approaching the land, and his own canoe reached the point just as
his enemy disappeared.  As its movements had not been directed, it
touched the shore a few yards from the other boat; and though the
rifle of his foe had to be loaded, there was not time to secure
his prize, and carry it beyond danger, before he would be exposed
to another shot.  Under the circumstances, therefore, he did not
pause an instant, but dashed into the woods and sought a cover.

On the immediate point there was a small open area, partly in
native grass, and partly beach, but a dense fringe of bushes lined
its upper side.  This narrow belt of dwarf vegetation passed, one
issued immediately into the high and gloomy vaults of the forest.
The land was tolerably level for a few hundred feet, and then it
rose precipitously in a mountainside.  The trees were tall, large,
and so free from underbrush, that they resembled vast columns,
irregularly scattered, upholding a dome of leaves.  Although they
stood tolerably close together, for their ages and size, the eye
could penetrate to consid