visible though the light
penetrated to considerable distances in all directions around the
fire.  Once or twice he started, as he thought he recognized her
laugh; but his ears were deceived by the soft melody that is so
common to the Indian female voice.  At length the old woman spoke
loud and angrily, and then he caught a glimpse of one or two dark
figures in the background of trees, which turned as if obedient
to the rebuke, and walked more within the circle of the light.  A
young warrior's form first came fairly into view; then followed
two youthful females, one of whom proved to be the Delaware girl.
Deerslayer now comprehended it all.  Hist was watched, possibly
by her young companion, certainly by the old woman.  The youth was
probably some suitor of either her or her companion; but even his
discretion was distrusted under the influence of his admiration.
The known vicinity of those who might be supposed to be her friends,
and the arrival of a strange red man on the lake had induced
more than the usual care, and the girl had not been able to slip
away from those who watched her in order to keep her appointment.
Deerslayer traced her uneasiness by her attempting once or twice
to look up through the branches of the trees, as if endeavouring
to get glimpses of the star she had herself named as the sign for
meeting.  All was vain, however, and after strolling about the camp
a little longer, in affected indifference, the two girls quitted
their male escort, and took seats among their own sex.  As soon
as this was done, the old sentinel changed her place to one more
agreeable to herself, a certain proof that she had hitherto been
exclusively on watch.

Deerslayer now felt greatly at a loss how to proceed.  He well
knew that Chingachgook could never be persuaded to return to the
ark without making some desperate effort for the recovery of his
mistress, and his own generous feelings well disposed him to aid in
such an undertaking.  He thought he saw the signs of an intention
among the females to retire for the night; and should he remain,
and the fire continue to give out its light, he might discover the
particular hut or arbour under which Hist reposed; a circumstance
that would be of infinite use in their future proceedings.  Should he
remain, however, much longer where he was, there was great danger
that the impatience of his friend would drive him into some act
of imprudence.  At each instant, indeed, he expected to see the
swarthy form of the Delaware appearing in the background, like the
tiger prowling around the fold.  Taking all things into consideration,
therefore, he came to the conclusion it would be better to rejoin
his friend, and endeavour to temper his impetuosity by some of his
own coolness and discretion.  It required but a minute or two to
put this plan in execution, the canoe returning to the strand some
ten or fifteen minutes after it had left it.

Contrary to his expectations, perhaps, Deerslayer found the Indian
at his post, from which he had not stirred, fearful that his betrothed
might arrive during his absence.  A conference followed, in which
Chingachgook was made acquainted with the state of things in the
camp.  When Hist named the point as the place of meeting, it was
with the expectation of making her escape from the old position,
and of repairing to a spot that she expected to find without any
occupants; but the sudden change of localities had disconcerted
all her plans.  A much greater degree of vigilance than had been
previously required was now necessary; and the circumstance that
an aged woman was on watch also denoted some special grounds of
alarm.  All these considerations, and many more that will readily
suggest themselves to the reader, were briefly discussed before
the young men came to any decision.  The occasion, however, being
one that required acts instead of words, the course to be pursued
was soon chosen.

Disposing of the canoe in such a manner that Hist must see it,
should she come to the place of meeting previously to their return,
the young men looked to their arms and prepared to enter the wood.
The whole projection into the lake contained about two acres of
land; and the part that formed the point, and on which the camp was
placed, did not compose a surface of more than half that size.  It
was principally covered with oaks, which, as is usual in the American
forests, grew to a great height without throwing out a branch, and
then arched in a dense and rich foliage.  Beneath, except the fringe
of thick bushes along the shore, there was very little underbrush;
though, in consequence of their shape, the trees were closer
together than is common in regions where the axe has been freely
used, resembling tall, straight, rustic columns, upholding the
usual canopy of leaves.  The surface of the land was tolerably even,
but it had a small rise near its centre, which divided it into a
northern and southern half.  On the latter, the Hurons had built
their fire, profiting by the formation to conceal it from their
enemies, who, it will be remembered, were supposed to be in the
castle, which bore northerly.  A brook also came brawling down the
sides of the adjacent hills, and found its way into the lake on the
southern side of the point.  It had cut for itself a deep passage
through some of the higher portions of the ground, and, in later
days, when this spot has become subjected to the uses of civilization,
by its windings and shaded banks, it has become no mean accessory
in contributing to the beauty of the place.  This brook lay west
of the encampment, and its waters found their way into the great
reservoir of that region on the same side, and quite near to
the spot chosen for the fire.  All these peculiarities, so far as
circumstances allowed, had been noted by Deerslayer, and explained
to his friend.

The reader will understand that the little rise in the ground,
that lay behind the Indian encampment, greatly favoured the secret
advance of the two adventurers.  It prevented the light of the fire
diffusing itself on the ground directly in the rear, although the
land fell away towards the water, so as to leave what might be
termed the left, or eastern flank of the position unprotected by
this covering.  We have said unprotected, though that is not properly
the word, since the knoll behind the huts and the fire offered a
cover for those who were now stealthily approaching, rather than
any protection to the Indians.  Deerslayer did not break through
the fringe of bushes immediately abreast of the canoe, which might
have brought him too suddenly within the influence of the light,
since the hillock did not extend to the water; but he followed the
beach northerly until he had got nearly on the opposite side of
the tongue of land, which brought him under the shelter of the low
acclivity, and consequently more in the shadow.

As soon as the friends emerged from the bushes, they stopped to
reconnoitre.  The fire was still blazing behind the little ridge,
casting its light upward into the tops of the trees, producing an
effect that was more pleasing than advantageous.  Still the glare
had its uses; for, while the background was in obscurity, the
foreground was in strong light; exposing the savages and concealing
their foes.  Profiting by the latter circumstance, the young men
advanced cautiously towards the ridge, Deerslayer in front, for he
insisted on this arrangement, lest the Delaware should be led by
his feelings into some indiscretion.  It required but a moment to
reach the foot of the little ascent, and then commenced the most
critical part of the enterprise.  Moving with exceeding caution,
and trailing his rifle, both to keep its barrel out of view, and
in readiness for service, the hunter put foot before foot, until
he had got sufficiently high to overlook the summit, his own head
being alone brought into the light.  Chingachgook was at his side
and both paused to take another close examination of the camp.  In
order, however, to protect themselves against any straggler in the
rear, they placed their bodies against the trunk of an oak, standing
on the side next the fire.

The view that Deerslayer now obtained of the camp was exactly the
reverse of that he had perceived from the water.  The dim figures
which he had formerly discovered must have been on the summit of the
ridge, a few feet in advance of the spot where he was now posted.
The fire was still blazing brightly, and around it were seated on
logs thirteen warriors, which accounted for all whom he had seen
from the canoe.  They were conversing, with much earnestness among
themselves, the image of the elephant passing from hand to hand.
The first burst of savage wonder had abated, and the question now
under discussion was the probable existence, the history and the
habits of so extraordinary an animal.  We have not leisure to record
the opinions of these rude men on a subject so consonant to their
lives and experience; but little is hazarded in saying that they
were quite as plausible, and far more ingenious, than half the
conjectures that precede the demonstrations of science.  However
much they may have been at fault as to their conclusions and
inferences, it is certain that they discussed the questions with a
zealous and most undivided attention.  For the time being all else
was forgotten, and our adventurers could not have approached at a
more fortunate instant.

The females were collected near each other, much as Deerslayer
had last seen them, nearly in a line between the place where he
now stood and the fire.  The distance from the oak against which
the young men leaned and the warriors was about thirty yards; the
women may have been half that number of yards nigher.  The latter,
indeed, were so near as to make the utmost circumspection, as to
motion and noise, indispensable.  Although they conversed in their
low, soft voices it was possible, in the profound stillness of the
woods, even to catch passages of the discourse; and the light-hearted
laugh that escaped the girls might occasionally have reached the
canoe.  Deerslayer felt the tremolo that passed through the frame
of his friend when the latter first caught the sweet sounds that
issued from the plump, pretty lips of Hist.  He even laid a hand
on the shoulder of the Indian, as a sort of admonition to command
himself.  As the conversation grew more earnest, each leaned forward
to listen.

"The Hurons have more curious beasts than that," said one of the
girls, contemptuously, for, like the men, they conversed of the
elephant and his qualities.  "The Delawares will think this creature
wonderful, but tomorrow no Huron tongue will talk of it.  Our young
men will find him if the animals dare to come near our wigwams!"

This was, in fact, addressed to Wah-ta-Wah, though she who spoke
uttered her words with an assumed diffidence and humility that
prevented her looking at the other.

"The Delawares are so far from letting such creatures come into
their country," returned Hist, "that no one has even seen their
images there!  Their young men would frighten away the images as
well as the beasts."

"The Delaware young men!  - the nation is women - even the deer
walk when they hear their hunters coming!  Who has ever heard the
name of a young Delaware warrior?"

This was said in good-humour, and with a laugh; but it was also
said bitingly.  That Hist so felt it, was apparent by the spirit
betrayed in her answer.

"Who has ever heard the name of a young Delaware?" she repeated
earnestly.  "Tamenund, himself, though now as old as the pines on
the hill, or as the eagles in the air, was once young; his name
was heard from the great salt lake to the sweet waters of the west.
What is the family of Uncas?  Where is another as great, though the
pale-faces have ploughed up its grates, and trodden on its bones?
Do the eagles fly as high, is the deer as swift or the panther as
brave?  Is there no young warrior of that race?  Let the Huron maidens
open their eyes wider, and they may see one called Chingachgook,
who is as stately as a young ash, and as tough as the hickory."

As the girl used her figurative language and told her companions
to "open their eyes, and they would see" the Delaware, Deerslayer
thrust his fingers into the sides of his friend, and indulged in a
fit of his hearty, benevolent laughter.  The other smiled; but the
language of the speaker was too flattering, and the tones of her
voice too sweet for him to be led away by any accidental coincidence,
however ludicrous.  The speech of Hist produced a retort, and the
dispute, though conducted in good-humour, and without any of the
coarse violence of tone and gesture that often impairs the charms
of the sex in what is called civilized life, grew warm and slightly
clamorous.  In the midst of this scene, the Delaware caused his
friend to stoop, so as completely to conceal himself, and then he
made a noise so closely resembling the little chirrup of the smallest
species of the American squirrel, that Deerslayer himself, though
he had heard the imitation a hundred times, actually thought it
came from one of the little animals skipping about over his head.
The sound is so familiar in the woods, that none of the Hurons paid
it the least attention.  Hist, however, instantly ceased talking,
and sat motionless.  Still she had sufficient self-command to
abstain from turning her head.  She had heard the signal by which
her lover so often called her from the wigwam to the stolen interview,
and it came over her senses and her heart, as the serenade affects
the maiden in the land of song.

From that moment, Chingachgook felt certain that his presence was
known.  This was effecting much, and he could now hope for a bolder
line of conduct on the part of his mistress than she might dare to
adopt under an uncertainty of his situation.  It left no doubt of
her endeavouring to aid him in his effort to release her.  Deerslayer
arose as soon as the signal was given, and though he had never
held that sweet communion which is known only to lovers, he was
not slow to detect the great change that had come over the manner
of the girl.  She still affected to dispute, though it was no longer
with spirit and ingenuity, but what she said was uttered more as
a lure to draw her antagonists on to an easy conquest, than with
any hopes of succeeding herself.  Once or twice, it is true, her
native readiness suggested a retort, or an argument that raised a
laugh, and gave her a momentary advantage; but these little sallies,
the offspring of mother-wit, served the better to conceal her real
feelings, and to give to the triumph of the other party a more
natural air than it might have possessed without them.  At length
the disputants became wearied, and they rose in a body as if about
to separate.  It was now that Hist, for the first time, ventured
to turn her face in the direction whence the signal had come.  In
doing this, her movements were natural, but guarded, and she stretched
her arm and yawned, as if overcome with a desire to sleep.  The
chirrup was again heard, and the girl felt satisfied as to the
position of her lover, though the strong light in which she herself
was placed, and the comparative darkness in which the adventurers
stood, prevented her from seeing their heads, the only portions
of their forms that appeared above the ridge at all.  The tree
against which they were posted had a dark shadow cast upon it by
the intervention of an enormous pine that grew between it and the
fire, a circumstance which alone would have rendered objects within
its cloud invisible at any distance.  This Deerslayer well knew,
and it was one of the reasons why he had selected this particular
tree.

The moment was near when it became necessary for Hist to act.  She
was to sleep in a small hut, or bower, that had been built near where
she stood, and her companion was the aged hag already mentioned.
Once within the hut, with this sleepless old woman stretched across
the entrance, as was her nightly practice, the hope of escape was
nearly destroyed, and she might at any moment be summoned to her
bed.  Luckily, at this instant one of the warriors called to the
old woman by name, and bade her bring him water to drink.  There
was a delicious spring on the northern side of the point, and the
hag took a gourd from a branch and, summoning Hist to her side,
she moved towards the summit of the ridge, intending to descend
and cross the point to the natural fountain.  All this was seen
and understood by the adventurers, and they fell back into the
obscurity, concealing their persons by trees, until the two females
had passed them.  In walking, Hist was held tightly by the hand.
As she moved by the tree that hid Chingachgook and his friend the
former felt for his tomahawk, with the intention to bury it in the
brain of the woman.  But the other saw the hazard of such a measure,
since a single scream might bring all the warriors upon them, and
he was averse to the act on considerations of humanity.  His hand,
therefore, prevented the blow.  Still as the two moved past, the
chirrup was repeated, and the Huron woman stopped and faced the
tree whence the sounds seemed to proceed, standing, at the moment,
within six feet of her enemies.  She expressed her surprise that a
squirrel should be in motion at so late an hour, and said it boded
evil.  Hist answered that she had heard the same squirrel three
times within the last twenty minutes, and that she supposed it was
waiting to obtain some of the crumbs left from the late supper.
This explanation appeared satisfactory, and they moved towards the
spring, the men following stealthily and closely.  The gourd was
filled, and the old woman was hurrying back, her hand still grasping
the wrist of the girl, when she was suddenly seized so violently by
the throat as to cause her to release her captive, and to prevent
her making any other sound than a sort of gurgling, suffocating
noise.  The Serpent passed his arm round the waist of his mistress
and dashed through the bushes with her, on the north side of the
point.  Here he immediately turned along the beach and ran towards
the canoe.  A more direct course could have been taken, but it
might have led to a discovery of the place of embarking.

Deerslayer kept playing on the throat of the old woman like the
keys of an organ, occasionally allowing her to breathe, and then
compressing his fingers again nearly to strangling.  The brief
intervals for breath, however, were well improved, and the hag
succeeded in letting out a screech or two that served to alarm the
camp.  The tramp of the warriors, as they sprang from the fire,
was plainly audible, and at the next moment three or four of them
appeared on the top of the ridge, drawn against the background of
light, resembling the dim shadows of the phantasmagoria.  It was
now quite time for the hunter to retreat.  Tripping up the heels
of his captive, and giving her throat a parting squeeze, quite as
much in resentment at her indomitable efforts to sound the alarm
as from any policy, he left her on her back, and moved towards the
bushes, his rifle at a poise, and his head over his shoulders, like
a lion at bay.



Chapter XVII.


There, ye wise saints, behold your light, your star, Ye would be
dupes and victims and ye are.  Is it enough?  or, must I, while a
thrill Lives in your sapient bosoms, cheat you still?"

Thomas Moore, Lalla Rookh, "The Veiled Prophet of Khorassan"

The fire, the canoe, and the spring, near which Deerslayer commenced
his retreat, would have stood in the angles of a triangle of tolerably
equal sides.  The distance from the fire to the boat was a little
less than the distance from the fire to the spring, while the
distance from the spring to the boat was about equal to that between
the two points first named.  This, however, was in straight lines,
a means of escape to which the fugitives could not resort.  They
were obliged to have recourse to a detour in order to get the cover
of the bushes, and to follow the curvature of the beach.  Under
these disadvantages, then, the hunter commenced his retreat,
disadvantages that he felt to be so much the greater from his
knowledge of the habits of all Indians, who rarely fail in cases
of sudden alarms, more especially when in the midst of cover,
immediately to throw out flankers, with a view to meet their foes
at all points, and if possible to turn their rear.  That some such
course was now adopted he believed from the tramp of feet, which
not only came up the ascent, as related, but were also heard, under
the first impulse, diverging not only towards the hill in the rear,
but towards the extremity of the point, in a direction opposite
to that he was about to take himself.  Promptitude, consequently
became a matter of the last importance, as the parties might meet
on the strand, before the fugitive could reach the canoe.

Notwithstanding the pressing nature of the emergency, Deerslayer
hesitated a single instant, ere he plunged into the bushes that lined
the shore.  His feelings had been awakened by the whole scene, and
a sternness of purpose had come over him, to which he was ordinarily
a stranger.  Four dark figures loomed on the ridge, drawn against
the brightness of the fire, and an enemy might have been sacrificed
at a glance.  The Indians had paused to gaze into the gloom, in
search of the screeching hag, and with many a man less given to
reflection than the hunter, the death of one of them would have
been certain.  Luckily he was more prudent.  Although the rifle
dropped a little towards the foremost of his pursuers, he did not
aim or fire, but disappeared in the cover.  To gain the beach, and
to follow it round to the place where Chingachgook was already in
the canoe, with Hist, anxiously waiting his appearance, occupied but
a moment.  Laying his rifle in the bottom of the canoe, Deerslayer
stooped to give the latter a vigorous shove from the shore, when a
powerful Indian leaped through the bushes, alighting like a panther
on his back.  Everything was now suspended by a hair; a false step
ruining all.  With a generosity that would have rendered a Roman
illustrious throughout all time, but which, in the career of one
so simple and humble, would have been forever lost to the world but
for this unpretending legend, Deerslayer threw all his force into
a desperate effort, shoved the canoe off with a power that sent it
a hundred feet from the shore, as it might be in an instant, and
fell forward into the lake, himself, face downward; his assailant
necessarily following him.

Although the water was deep within a few yards of the beach, it
was not more than breast high, as close in as the spot where the
two combatants fell.  Still this was quite sufficient to destroy
one who had sunk, under the great disadvantages in which Deerslayer
was placed.  His hands were free, however, and the savage was
compelled to relinquish his hug, to keep his own face above the
surface.  For half a minute there was a desperate struggle, like
the floundering of an alligator that has just seized some powerful
prey, and then both stood erect, grasping each other's arms, in
order to prevent the use of the deadly knife in the darkness.  What
might have been the issue of this severe personal struggle cannot
be known, for half a dozen savages came leaping into the water to
the aid of their friend, and Deerslayer yielded himself a prisoner,
with a dignity that was as remarkable as his self-devotion.

To quit the lake and lead their new captive to the fire occupied
the Indians but another minute.  So much engaged were they all
with the struggle and its consequences, that the canoe was unseen,
though it still lay so near the shore as to render every syllable
that was uttered perfectly intelligible to the Delaware and his
betrothed; and the whole party left the spot, some continuing the
pursuit after Hist, along the beach, though most proceeded to the
light.  Here Deerslayer's antagonist so far recovered his breath and
his recollection, for he had been throttled nearly to strangulation,
as to relate the manner in which the girl had got off.  It was
now too late to assail the other fugitives, for no sooner was his
friend led into the bushes than the Delaware placed his paddle into
the water, and the light canoe glided noiselessly away, holding its
course towards the centre of the lake until safe from shot, after
which it sought the Ark.  When Deerslayer reached the fire, he found
himself surrounded by no less than eight grim savages, among whom
was his old acquaintance Rivenoak.  As soon as the latter caught a
glimpse of the captive's countenance, he spoke apart to his companions,
and a low but general exclamation of pleasure and surprise escaped
them.  They knew that the conqueror of their late friend, he who
had fallen on the opposite side of the lake, was in their hands,
and subject to their mercy, or vengeance.  There was no little
admiration mingled in the ferocious looks that were thrown on the
prisoner; an admiration that was as much excited by his present
composure, as by his past deeds.  This scene may be said to
have been the commencement of the great and terrible reputation
that Deerslayer, or Hawkeye, as he was afterwards called, enjoyed
among all the tribes of New York and Canada; a reputation that was
certainly more limited in its territorial and numerical extent,
than those which are possessed in civilized life, but which was
compensated for what it wanted in these particulars, perhaps, by
its greater justice, and the total absence of mystification and
management.

The arms of Deerslayer were not pinioned, and he was left the
free use of his hands, his knife having been first removed.  The
only precaution that was taken to secure his person was untiring
watchfulness, and a strong rope of bark that passed from ankle to
ankle, not so much to prevent his walking, as to place an obstacle
in the way of his attempting to escape by any sudden leap.  Even
this extra provision against flight was not made until the captive
had been brought to the light, and his character ascertained.  It
was, in fact, a compliment to his prowess, and he felt proud of
the distinction.  That he might be bound when the warriors slept he
thought probable, but to be bound in the moment of capture showed
that he was already, and thus early, attaining a name.  While the
young Indians were fastening the rope, he wondered if Chingachgook
would have been treated in the same manner, had he too fallen
into the hands of the enemy.  Nor did the reputation of the young
pale-face rest altogether on his success in the previous combat, or
in his discriminating and cool manner of managing the late negotiation,
for it had received a great accession by the occurrences of the
night.  Ignorant of the movements of the Ark, and of the accident
that had brought their fire into view, the Iroquois attributed the
discovery of their new camp to the vigilance of so shrewd a foe.
The manner in which he ventured upon the point, the abstraction or
escape of Hist, and most of all the self-devotion of the prisoner,
united to the readiness with which he had sent the canoe adrift,
were so many important links in the chain of facts, on which his
growing fame was founded.  Many of these circumstances had been
seen, some had been explained, and all were understood.

While this admiration and these honors were so unreservedly bestowed
on Deerslayer, he did not escape some of the penalties of his
situation.  He was permitted to seat himself on the end of a log,
near the fire, in order to dry his clothes, his late adversary
standing opposite, now holding articles of his own scanty vestments
to the heat, and now feeling his throat, on which the marks of his
enemy's fingers were still quite visible.  The rest of the warriors
consulted together, near at hand, all those who had been out having
returned to report that no signs of any other prowlers near the
camp were to be found.  In this state of things, the old woman,
whose name was Shebear, in plain English, approached Deerslayer,
with her fists clenched and her eyes flashing fire.  Hitherto, she
had been occupied with screaming, an employment at which she had
played her part with no small degree of success, but having succeeded
in effectually alarming all within reach of a pair of lungs that had
been strengthened by long practice, she next turned her attention to
the injuries her own person had sustained in the struggle.  These
were in no manner material, though they were of a nature to arouse
all the fury of a woman who had long ceased to attract by means
of the gentler qualities, and who was much disposed to revenge the
hardships she had so long endured, as the neglected wife and mother
of savages, on all who came within her power.  If Deerslayer had not
permanently injured her, he had temporarily caused her to suffer,
and she was not a person to overlook a wrong of this nature, on
account of its motive.

"Skunk of the pale-faces," commenced this exasperated and semi-poetic
fury, shaking her fist under the nose of the impassable hunter, "you
are not even a woman.  Your friends the Delawares are only women,
and you are their sheep.  Your own people will not own you, and no
tribe of redmen would have you in their wigwams; you skulk among
petticoated warriors.  You slay our brave friend who has left us?
- No- his great soul scorned to fight you, and left his body rather
than have the shame of slaying you!  But the blood that you spilt
when the spirit was not looking on, has not sunk into the ground.
It must be buried in your groans.  What music do I hear?  Those
are not the wailings of a red man!  - no red warrior groans so much
like a hog.  They come from a pale-face throat - a Yengeese bosom,
and sound as pleasant as girls singing - Dog - skunk - woodchuck
-mink - hedgehog - pig - toad - spider -yengee -"

Here the old woman, having expended her breath and exhausted
her epithets, was fain to pause a moment, though both her fists
were shaken in the prisoner's face, and the whole of her wrinkled
countenance was filled with fierce resentment.  Deerslayer looked
upon these impotent attempts to arouse him as indifferently as
a gentleman in our own state of society regards the vituperative
terms of a blackguard: the one party feeling that the tongue of an
old woman could never injure a warrior, and the other knowing that
mendacity and vulgarity can only permanently affect those who resort
to their use; but he was spared any further attack at present, by
the interposition of Rivenoak, who shoved aside the hag, bidding
her quit the spot, and prepared to take his seat at the side of his
prisoner.  The old woman withdrew, but the hunter well understood
that he was to be the subject of all her means of annoyance, if
not of positive injury, so long as he remained in the power of his
enemies, for nothing rankles so deeply as the consciousness that
an attempt to irritate has been met by contempt, a feeling that
is usually the most passive of any that is harbored in the human
breast.  Rivenoak quietly took the seat we have mentioned, and,
after a short pause, he commenced a dialogue, which we translate
as usual, for the benefit of those readers who have not studied
the North American languages.

"My pale-face friend is very welcome," said the Indian, with a
familiar nod, and a smile so covert that it required all Deerslayer's
vigilance to detect, and not a little of his philosophy to detect
unmoved; "he is welcome.  The Hurons keep a hot fire to dry the
white man's clothes by."

"I thank you, Huron - or Mingo, as I most like to call you,"
returned the other, "I thank you for the welcome, and I thank you
for the fire.  Each is good in its way, and the last is very good,
when one has been in a spring as cold as the Glimmerglass.  Even
Huron warmth may be pleasant, at such a time, to a man with a
Delaware heart."

"The pale-face - but my brother has a name?  So great a warrior
would not have lived without a name?"

"Mingo," said the hunter, a little of the weakness of human nature
exhibiting itself in the glance of his eye, and the colour on his
cheek - "Mingo, your brave called me Hawkeye, I suppose on account
of a quick and sartain aim, when he was lying with his head in my
lap, afore his spirit started for the Happy Hunting Grounds."

"'Tis a good name!  The hawk is sure of his blow.  Hawkeye is not
a woman; why does he live with the Delawares?"

"I understand you, Mingo, but we look on all that as a sarcumvention
of some of your subtle devils, and deny the charge.  Providence
placed me among the Delawares young, and, 'bating what Christian
usages demand of my colour and gifts, I hope to live and die in
their tribe.  Still I do not mean to throw away altogether my natyve
rights, and shall strive to do a pale-face's duty, in red-skin
society."

"Good; a Huron is a red-skin, as well as a Delaware.  Hawkeye is
more of a Huron than of a woman."

"I suppose you know, Mingo, your own meaning; if you don't I make
no question 'tis well known to Satan.  But if you wish to get
any thing out of me, speak plainer, for bargains can not be made
blindfolded, or tongue tied."

"Good; Hawkeye has not a forked tongue, and he likes to say what he
thinks.  He is an acquaintance of the Muskrat," this was the name
by which all the Indians designated Hutter - "and has lived in
his wigwam.  But he is not a friend.  He wants no scalps, like a
miserable Indian, but fights like a stout-hearted pale-face.  The
Muskrat is neither white, nor red.  Neither a beast nor a fish.
He is a water snake; sometimes in the spring and sometimes on the
land.  He looks for scalps, like an outcast.  Hawkeye can go back
and tell him how he has outwitted the Hurons, how he has escaped,
and when his eyes are in a fog, when he can't see as far as from
his cabin to the shore, then Hawkeye can open the door for the
Hurons.  And how will the plunder be divided?  Why, Hawkeye, will
carry away the most, and the Hurons will take what he may choose
to leave behind him.  The scalps can go to Canada, for a pale-face
has no satisfaction in them."

"Well, well, Rivenoak - for so I hear 'em tarm you - This is plain
English, enough, though spoken in Iroquois.  I understand all you
mean, now, and must say it out-devils even Mingo deviltry!  No
doubt, 'twould be easy enough to go back and tell the Muskrat that
I had got away from you, and gain some credit, too, by the expl'ite."

"Good.  That is what I want the pale-face to do."

"Yes - yes - That's plain enough.  I know what you want me to do,
without more words.  When inside the house, and eating the Muskrat's
bread, and laughing and talking with his pretty darters, I might
put his eyes into so thick a fog, that he couldn't even see the
door, much less the land."

"Good!  Hawkeye should have been born a Huron!  His blood is not
more than half white!"

"There you're out, Huron; yes, there you're as much out, as if you
mistook a wolf for a catamount.  I'm white in blood, heart, natur'
and gifts, though a little red-skin in feelin's and habits.  But
when old Hutter's eyes are well befogged, and his pretty darters
perhaps in a deep sleep, and Hurry Harry, the Great Pine as you
Indians tarm him, is dreaming of any thing but mischief, and all
suppose Hawkeye is acting as a faithful sentinel, all I have to
do is set a torch somewhere in sight for a signal, open the door,
and let in the Hurons, to knock 'em all on the head."

"Surely my brother is mistaken.  He cannot be white!  He is worthy
to be a great chief among the Hurons!"

"That is true enough, I dares to say, if he could do all this.
Now, harkee, Huron, and for once hear a few honest words from the
mouth of a plain man.  I am Christian born, and them that come
of such a stock, and that listen to the words that were spoken to
their fathers and will be spoken to their children, until 'arth and
all it holds perishes, can never lend themselves to such wickedness.
Sarcumventions in war, may be, and are, lawful; but sarcumventions,
and deceit, and treachery among fri'inds are fit only for the
pale-face devils.  I know that there are white men enough to give
you this wrong idee of our natur', but such be ontrue to their
blood and gifts, and ought to be, if they are not, outcasts and
vagabonds.  No upright pale-face could do what you wish, and to
be as plain with you as I wish to be, in my judgment no upright
Delaware either.  With a Mingo it may be different."

The Huron listened to this rebuke with obvious disgust, but he had
his ends in view, and was too wily to lose all chance of effecting
them by a precipitate avowal of resentment.  Affecting to smile,
he seemed to listen eagerly, and he then pondered on what he had
heard.

"Does Hawkeye love the Muskrat?" he abruptly demanded; "Or does he
love his daughters?"

"Neither, Mingo.  Old Tom is not a man to gain my love, and, as
for the darters, they are comely enough to gain the liking of any
young man, but there's reason ag'in any very great love for either.
Hetty is a good soul, but natur' has laid a heavy hand on her mind,
poor thing."

"And the Wild Rose!" exclaimed the Huron - for the fame of Judith's
beauty had spread among those who could travel the wilderness, as
well as the highway by means of old eagles' nests, rocks, and riven
trees known to them by report and tradition, as well as among the
white borderers, "And the Wild Rose; is she not sweet enough to be
put in the bosom of my brother?"

Deerslayer had far too much of the innate gentleman to insinuate
aught against the fair fame of one who, by nature and position
was so helpless, and as he did not choose to utter an untruth, he
preferred being silent.  The Huron mistook the motive, and supposed
that disappointed affection lay at the bottom of his reserve.
Still bent on corrupting or bribing his captive, in order to obtain
possession of the treasures with which his imagination filled the
Castle, he persevered in his attack.

"Hawkeye is talking with a friend," he continued.  "He knows that
Rivenoak is a man of his word, for they have traded together, and
trade opens the soul.  My friend has come here on account of a
little string held by a girl, that can pull the whole body of the
sternest warrior?"

"You are nearer the truth, now, Huron, than you've been afore,
since we began to talk.  This is true.  But one end of that string
was not fast to my heart, nor did the Wild Rose hold the other."

"This is wonderful!  Does my brother love in his head, and not in
his heart?  And can the Feeble Mind pull so hard against so stout
a warrior?"

"There it is ag'in; sometimes right, and sometimes wrong!  The
string you mean is fast to the heart of a great Delaware; one of
Mohican stock in fact, living among the Delawares since the disparsion
of his own people, and of the family of Uncas - Chingachgook by
name, or Great Sarpent.  He has come here, led by the string, and
I've followed, or rather come afore, for I got here first, pulled
by nothing stronger than fri'ndship; which is strong enough for such
as are not niggardly of their feelin's, and are willing to live a
little for their fellow creatur's, as well as for themselves."

"But a string has two ends - one is fast to the mind of a Mohican;
and the other?"

"Why the other was here close to the fire, half an hour since.
Wah-ta-Wah held it in her hand, if she didn't hold it to her heart."

"I understand what you mean, my brother," returned the Indian gravely,
for the first time catching a direct clue to the adventures of the
evening.  "The Great Serpent, being strongest, pulled the hardest,
and Hist was forced to leave us."

"I don't think there was much pulling about it," answered the other,
laughing, always in his silent manner, with as much heartiness as
if he were not a captive, and in danger of torture or death -"I
don't think there was much pulling about it; no I don't.  Lord
help you, Huron!  He likes the gal, and the gal likes him, and
it surpassed Huron sarcumventions to keep two young people apart,
where there was so strong a feelin' to bring 'em together."

"And Hawkeye and Chingachgook came into our camp on this errand,
only?"

"That's a question that'll answer itself, Mingo!  Yes, if a question
could talk it would answer itself, to your parfect satisfaction.  For
what else should we come?  And yet, it isn't exactly so, neither;
for we didn't come into your camp at all, but only as far as that
pine, there, that you see on the other side of the ridge, where we
stood watching your movements, and conduct, as long as we liked.
When we were ready, the Sarpent gave his signal, and then all went
just as it should, down to the moment when yonder vagabond leaped
upon my back.  Sartain; we come for that, and for no other purpose,
and we got what we come for; there's no use in pretending otherwise.
Hist is off with a man who's the next thing to her husband, and
come what will to me, that's one good thing detarmined."

"What sign, or signal, told the young maiden that her lover was
nigh?"  asked the Huron with more curiosity than it was usual for
him to betray.

Deerslayer laughed again, and seem'd to enjoy the success of the
exploit, with as much glee as if he had not been its victim.

"Your squirrels are great gadabouts, Mingo," he cried still laughing
-"yes, they're sartainly great gadabouts!  When other folk's squirrels
are at home and asleep, yourn keep in motion among the trees, and
chirrup and sing, in a way that even a Delaware gal can understand
their musick!  Well, there's four legged squirrels, and there's two
legged squirrels, and give me the last, when there's a good tight
string atween two hearts.  If one brings 'em together, t'other
tells when to pull hardest!"

The Huron looked vexed, though he succeeded in suppressing any
violent exhibition of resentment.  He now quitted his prisoner and,
joining the rest of the warriors, he communicated the substance of
what he had learned.  As in his own case, admiration was mingled
with anger at the boldness and success of their enemies.  Three or
four of them ascended the little acclivity and gazed at the tree
where it was understood the adventurers had posted themselves, and
one even descended to it, and examined for foot prints around its
roots, in order to make sure that the statement was true.  The
result confirmed the story of the captive, and they all returned
to the fire with increased wonder and respect.  The messenger who
had arrived with some communication from the party above, while the
two adventurers were watching the camp, was now despatched with
some answer, and doubtless bore with him the intelligence of all
that had happened.

Down to this moment, the young Indian who had been seen walking in
company with Hist and another female had made no advances to any
communication with Deerslayer.  He had held himself aloof from his
friends, even, passing near the bevy of younger women, who were
clustering together, apart as usual, and conversed in low tones
on the subject of the escape of their late companion.  Perhaps it
would be true to say that these last were pleased as well as vexed
at what had just occurred.  Their female sympathies were with the
lovers, while their pride was bound up in the success of their own
tribe.  It is possible, too, that the superior personal advantages
of Hist rendered her dangerous to some of the younger part of the
group, and they were not sorry to find she was no longer in the
way of their own ascendency.  On the whole, however, the better
feeling was most prevalent, for neither the wild condition in
which they lived, the clannish prejudices of tribes, nor their hard
fortunes as Indian women , could entirely conquer the inextinguishable
leaning of their sex to the affections.  One of the girls even
laughed at the disconsolate look of the swain who might fancy
himself deserted, a circumstance that seemed suddenly to arouse
his energies, and induce him to move towards the log, on which the
prisoner was still seated, drying his clothes.

"This is Catamount!" said the Indian, striking his hand boastfully
on his naked breast, as he uttered the words in a manner to show
how much weight he expected them to carry.

"This is Hawkeye," quietly returned Deerslayer, adopting the name
by which he knew he would be known in future, among all the tribes
of the Iroquois.  "My sight is keen; is my brother's leap long?"

"From here to the Delaware villages.  Hawkeye has stolen my wife;
he must bring her back, or his scalp will hang on a pole, and dry
in my wigwam."

"Hawkeye has stolen nothing, Huron.  He doesn't come of a thieving
breed, nor has he thieving gifts.  Your wife, as you call Wah-ta-Wah,
will never be the wife of any red-skin of the Canadas; her mind is
in the cabin of a Delaware, and her body has gone to find it.  The
catamount is actyve I know, but its legs can't keep pace with a
woman's wishes."

"The Serpent of the Delawares is a dog - he is a poor bull trout
that keeps in the water; he is afraid to stand on the hard earth,
like a brave Indian!"

"Well, well, Huron, that's pretty impudent, considering it's not
an hour since the Sarpent stood within a hundred feet of you, and
would have tried the toughness of your skin with a rifle bullet,
when I pointed you out to him, hadn't I laid the weight of
a little judgment on his hand.  You may take in timorsome gals in
the settlements, with your catamount whine, but the ears of a man
can tell truth from ontruth."

"Hist laughs at him!  She sees he is lame, and a poor hunter, and
he has never been on a war path.  She will take a man for a husband,
and not a fish."

"How do you know that, Catamount?  how do you know that?" returned
Deerslayer laughing.  "She has gone into the lake, you see, and
maybe she prefars a trout to a mongrel cat.  As for war paths,
neither the Sarpent nor I have much exper'ence, we are ready to
own, but if you don't call this one, you must tarm it, what the
gals in the settlements tarm it, the high road to matrimony.  Take
my advice, Catamount, and s'arch for a wife among the Huron women;
you'll never get one with a willing mind from among the Delawares."

Catamount's hand felt for his tomahawk, and when the fingers reached
the handle they worked convulsively, as if their owner hesitated
between policy and resentment.  At this critical moment Rivenoak
approached, and by a gesture of authority, induced the young man
to retire, assuming his former position, himself, on the log at the
side of Deerslayer.  Here he continued silent for a little time,
maintaining the grave reserve of an Indian chief.

"Hawkeye is right," the Iroquois at length began; "his sight is
so strong that he can see truth in a dark night, and our eyes have
been blinded.  He is an owl, darkness hiding nothing from him.  He
ought not to strike his friends.  He is right."

"I'm glad you think so, Mingo," returned the other, "for a traitor,
in my judgment, is worse than a coward.  I care as little for the
Muskrat, as one pale-face ought to care for another, but I care too
much for him to ambush him in the way you wished.  In short, according
to my idees, any sarcumventions, except open-war sarcumventions,
are ag'in both law, and what we whites call 'gospel', too."

"My pale-face brother is right; he is no Indian, to forget his
Manitou and his colour.  The Hurons know that they have a great
warrior for their prisoner, and they will treat him as one.  If he
is to be tortured, his torments shall be such as no common man can
bear; if he is to be treated as a friend, it will be the friendship
of chiefs."

As the Huron uttered this extraordinary assurance of consideration,
his eye furtively glanced at the countenance of his listener, in
order to discover how he stood the compliment, though his gravity
and apparent sincerity would have prevented any man but one practised
in artifices, from detecting his motives.  Deerslayer belonged
to the class of the unsuspicious, and acquainted with the Indian
notions of what constitutes respect, in matters connected with the
treatment of captives, he felt his blood chill at the announcement,
even while he maintained an aspect so steeled that his quick sighted
enemy could discover in it no signs of weakness.

"God has put me in your hands, Huron," the captive at length answered,
"and I suppose you will act your will on me.  I shall not boast of
what I can do, under torment, for I've never been tried, and no man
can say till he has been; but I'll do my endivours not to disgrace
the people among whom I got my training.  Howsever, I wish you
now to bear witness that I'm altogether of white blood, and, in a
nat'ral way of white gifts too; so, should I be overcome and forget
myself, I hope you'll lay the fault where it properly belongs, and
in no manner put it on the Delawares, or their allies and friends
the Mohicans.  We're all created with more or less weakness, and
I'm afeard it's a pale-face's to give in under great bodily torment,
when a red-skin will sing his songs, and boast of his deeds in the
very teeth of his foes."

"We shall see.  Hawkeye has a good countenance, and he is tough
-but why should he be tormented, when the Hurons love him?  He is
not born their enemy, and the death of one warrior will not cast
a cloud between them forever."

"So much the better, Huron; so much the better.  Still I don't wish
to owe any thing to a mistake about each other's meaning.  It is so
much the better that you bear no malice for the loss of a warrior
who fell in war, and yet it is ontrue that there is no inmity - lawful
inmity I mean - atween us.  So far as I have red-skin feelin's at
all, I've Delaware feelin's, and I leave you to judge for yourself
how far they are likely to be fri'ndly to the Mingos -"

Deerslayer ceased, for a sort of spectre stood before him, that
put a stop to his words, and, indeed, caused him for a moment to
doubt the fidelity of his boasted vision.  Hetty Hutter was standing
at the side of the fire as quietly as if she belonged to the tribe.

As the hunter and the Indian sat watching the emotions that were
betrayed in each other's countenance, the girl had approached
unnoticed, doubtless ascending from the beach on the southern side
of the point, or that next to the spot where the Ark had anchored,
and had advanced to the fire with the fearlessness that belonged to
her simplicity, and which was certainly justified by the treatment
formerly received from the Indians.  As soon as Rivenoak perceived
the girl, she was recognised, and calling to two or three of the
younger wariors, thee chief sent them out to reconnoitre, lest her
appearance should be the forerunner of another attack.  He then
motioned to Hetty to draw near.

"I hope your visit is a sign that the Sarpent and Hist are in
safety, Hetty," said Deerslayer, as soon as the girl had complied
with the Huron's request.  "I don't think you'd come ashore ag'in,
on the arr'nd that brought you here afore."

"Judith told me to come this time, Deerslayer," Hetty replied, "she
paddled me ashore herself, in a canoe, as soon as the Serpent had
shown her Hist and told his story.  How handsome Hist is tonight,
Deerslayer, and how much happier she looks than when she was with
the Hurons!"

"That's natur' gal; yes, that may be set down as human natur'.
She's with her betrothed, and no longer fears a Mingo husband.  In
my judgment Judith, herself, would lose most of her beauty if she
thought she was to bestow it all on a Mingo!  Content is a great
fortifier of good looks, and I'll warrant you, Hist is contented
enough, now she is out of the hands of these miscreants, and with
her chosen warrior!  Did you say that Judith told you to come ashore
- why should your sister do that?"

"She bid me come to see you, and to try and persuade the savages
to take more elephants to let you off, but I've brought the Bible
with me - that will do more than all the elephants in father's
chest!"

"And your father, good little Hetty - and Hurry; did they know of
your arr'nd?"

"Not they.  Both are asleep, and Judith and the Serpent thought it
best they should not be woke, lest they might want to come again
after scalps, when Hist had told them how few warriors, and how
many women and children there were in the camp.  Judith would give
me no peace, till I had co