me ashore to see what had happened to
you."

"Well, that's remarkable as consarns Judith!  Whey should she feel
so much unsartainty about me?  - Ah - - I see how it is, now; yes,
I see into the whole matter, now.  You must understand, Hetty,
that your sister is oneasy lest Harry March should wake, and come
blundering here into the hands of the inimy ag'in, under some
idee that, being a travelling comrade, he ought to help me in this
matter!  Hurry is a blunderer, I will allow, but I don't think he'd
risk as much for my sake, as he would for his own."

"Judith don't care for Hurry, though Hurry cares for her," replied
Hetty innocently, but quite positively.

"I've heard you say as much as that afore; yes, I've heard that
from you, afore, gal, and yet it isn't true.  One don't live in a
tribe, not to see something of the way in which liking works in a
woman's heart.  Though no way given to marrying myself, I've been
a looker on among the Delawares, and this is a matter in which
pale-face and red-skin gifts are all as one as the same.  When the
feelin' begins, the young woman is thoughtful, and has no eyes or
ears onless for the warrior that has taken her fancy; then follows
melancholy and sighing, and such sort of actions; after which,
especially if matters don't come to plain discourse, she often flies
round to back biting and fault finding, blaming the youth for the
very things she likes best in him.  Some young creatur's are forward
in this way of showing their love, and I'm of opinion Judith is
one of 'em.  Now, I've heard her as much as deny that Hurry was
good-looking, and the young woman who could do that, must be far
gone indeed!"

"The young woman who liked Hurry would own that he is handsome.  I
think Hurry very handsome, Deerslayer, and I'm sure everybody must
think so, that has eyes.  Judith don't like Harry March, and that's
the reason she finds fault with him."

"Well - well - my good little Hetty, have it your own way.  If we
should talk from now till winter, each would think as at present,
and there's no use in words.  I must believe that Judith is much
wrapped up in Hurry, and that, sooner or later, she'll have him;
and this, too, all the more from the manner in which she abuses
him; and I dare to say, you think just the contrary.  But mind what
I now tell you, gal, and pretend not to know it," continued this
being, who was so obtuse on a point on which men are usually quick
enough to make discoveries, and so acute in matters that would baffle
the observation of much the greater portion of mankind, "I see how
it is, with them vagabonds.  Rivenoak has left us, you see, and is
talking yonder with his young men, and though too far to be heard,
I can see what he is telling them.  Their orders is to watch your
movements, and to find where the canoe is to meet you, to take you
back to the Ark, and then to seize all and what they can.  I'm sorry
Judith sent you, for I suppose she wants you to go back ag'in."

"All that's settled, Deerslayer," returned the girl, in a low,
confidential and meaning manner, "and you may trust me to outwit
the best Indian of them all.  I know I am feeble minded, but I've
got some sense, and you'll see how I'll use it in getting back,
when my errand is done!"

"Ahs!  me, poor girl; I'm afeard all that's easier said than done.
They're a venomous set of riptyles and their p'ison's none the
milder, for the loss of Hist.  Well, I'm glad the Sarpent was the
one to get off with the gal, for now there'll be two happy at least,
whereas had he fallen into the hands of the Mingos, there'd been
two miserable, and another far from feelin' as a man likes to feel."

"Now you put me in mind of a part of my errand that I had almost
forgotten, Deerslayer.  Judith told me to ask you what you thought
the Hurons would do with you, if you couldn't be bought off, and
what she had best do to serve you.  Yes, this was the most important
part of the errand - what she had best do, in order to serve you?"

"That's as you think, Hetty; but it's no matter.  Young women are
apt to lay most stress on what most touches their feelin's; but
no matter; have it your own way, so you be but careful not to let
the vagabonds get the mastery of a canoe.  When you get back to the
Ark, tell 'em to keep close, and to keep moving too, most especially
at night.  Many hours can't go by without the troops on the river
hearing of this party, and then your fri'nds may look for relief.
'Tis but a day's march from the nearest garrison, and true soldiers
will never lie idle with the foe in their neighborhood.  This is my
advice, and you may say to your father and Hurry that scalp-hunting
will be a poor business now, as the Mingos are up and awake, and
nothing can save 'em, 'till the troops come, except keeping a good
belt of water atween 'em and the savages."

"What shall I tell Judith about you, Deerslayer; I know she will
send me back again, if I don't bring her the truth about you."

"Then tell her the truth.  I see no reason Judith Hutter shouldn't
hear the truth about me, as well as a lie.  I'm a captyve in Indian
hands, and Providence only knows what will come of it!  Harkee,
Hetty," dropping his voice and speaking still more confidentially,
"you are a little weak minded, it must be allowed, but you know
something of Injins.  Here I am in their hands, after having slain
one of their stoutest warriors, and they've been endivouring to
work upon me through fear of consequences, to betray your father,
and all in the Ark.  I understand the blackguards as well as
if they'd told it all out plainly, with their tongues.  They hold
up avarice afore me, on one side, and fear on t'other, and think
honesty will give way atween 'em both.  But let your father and Hurry
know, 'tis all useless; as for the Sarpent, he knows it already."

"But what shall I tell Judith?  She will certainly send me back,
if I don't satisfy her mind."

"Well, tell Judith the same.  No doubt the savages will try the
torments, to make me give in, and to revenge the loss of their
warrior, but I must hold out ag'in nat'ral weakness in the best manner
I can.  You may tell Judith to feel no consarn on my account-it
will come hard I know, seeing that a white man's gifts don't run to
boasting and singing under torment, for he generally feels smallest
when he suffers most - but you may tell her not to have any consarn.
I think I shall make out to stand it, and she may rely on this,
let me give in, as much as I may, and prove completely that I am
white, by wailings, and howlings, and even tears, yet I'll never fall
so far as to betray my fri'nds.  When it gets to burning holes in
the flesh, with heated ramrods, and to hacking the body, and tearing
the hair out by the roots, natur' may get the upperhand, so far
as groans, and complaints are consarned, but there the triumph of
the vagabonds will ind; nothing short of God's abandoning him to
the devils can make an honest man ontrue to his colour and duty."

Hetty listened with great attention, and her mild but speaking
countenance manifested a strong sympathy in the anticipated agony
of the supposititious sufferer.  At first she seemed at a loss
how to act; then, taking a hand of Deerslayer's she affectionately
recommended to him to borrow her Bible, and to read it while the
savages were inflicting their torments.  When the other honestly
admitted that it exceeded his power to read, she even volunteered
to remain with him, and to perform this holy office in person.  The
offer was gently declined, and Rivenoak being about to join them,
Deerslayer requested the girl to leave him, first enjoining her again
to tell those in the Ark to have full confidence in his fidelity.
Hetty now walked away, and approached the group of females with
as much confidence and self-possession as if she were a native of
the tribe.  On the other hand the Huron resumed his seat by the
side of his prisoner, the one continuing to ask questions with all
the wily ingenuity of a practised Indian counsellor, and the other
baffling him by the very means that are known to be the most
efficacious in defeating the finesse of the more pretending diplomacy
of civilization, or by confining his answers to the truth, and the
truth only.



Chapter XVIII


"Thus died she; never more on her Shall sorrow light, or shame.
She was not made Through years or moons the inner weight to bear,
Which colder hearts endure till they are laid By age in earth;
her days and pleasure were Brief but delightful - such as had not
stayed Long with her destiny; but she sleeps well By the sea-shore
whereon she loved to dwell."

Byron.  Don Juan, IV, lxxi.

The young men who had been sent out to reconnoitre, on the sudden
appearance of Hetty, soon returned to report their want of success
in making any discovery.  One of them had even been along the
beach as far as the spot opposite to the ark, but the darkness
had completely concealed that vessel from his notice.  Others had
examined in different directions, and everywhere the stillness of
night was added to the silence and solitude of the woods.

It was consequently believed that the girl had come alone, as on
her former visit, and on some similar errand.  The Iroquois were
ignorant that the ark had left the castle, and there were movements
projected, if not in the course of actual execution, by this time,
which also greatly added to the sense of security.  A watch was
set, therefore, and all but the sentinels disposed themselves to
sleep.  Sufficient care was had to the safe keeping of the captive,
without inflicting on him any unnecessary suffering; and, as for
Hetty, she was permitted to find a place among the Indian girls in
the best manner she could.  She did not find the friendly offices
of Hist, though her character not only bestowed impunity from
pain and captivity, but it procured for her a consideration and
an attention that placed her, on the score of comfort, quite on a
level with the wild but gentle beings around her.  She was supplied
with a skin, and made her own bed on a pile of boughs a little
apart from the huts.  Here she was soon in a profound sleep, like
all around her.

There were now thirteen men in the party, and three kept watch at
a time.  One remained in shadow, not far from the fire.  however.
His duty was to guard the captive, to take care that the fire
neither blazed up so as to illuminate the spot, nor yet became
wholly extinguished, and to keep an eye generally on the state of
the camp.  Another passed from one beach to the other, crossing
the base of the point, while the third kept moving slowly around
the strand on its outer extremity, to prevent a repetition of the
surprise that had already taken place that night.  This arrangement
was far from being usual among savages, who ordinarily rely more on
the secrecy of their movements, than or vigilance of this nature;
but it had been called for by the peculiarity of the circumstances
in which the Hurons were now placed.  Their position was known to
their foes, and it could not easily be changed at an hour which
demanded rest.  Perhaps, too, they placed most of their confidence
on the knowledge of what they believed to be passing higher up
the lake, and which, it was thought, would fully occupy the whole
of the pale-faces who were at liberty, with their solitary Indian
ally.  It was also probable Rivenoak was aware that, in holding
his captive, he had in his own hands the most dangerous of all his
enemies.

The precision with which those accustomed to watchfulness, or
lives of disturbed rest, sleep, is not the least of the phenomena
of our mysterious being.  The head is no sooner on the pillow
than consciousness is lost; and yet, at a necessary hour, the mind
appears to arouse the body, as promptly as if it had stood sentinel
the while over it.  There can be no doubt that they who are thus
roused awake by the influence of thought over matter, though the
mode in which this influence is exercised must remain hidden from
our curiosity until it shall be explained, should that hour ever
arrive, by the entire enlightenment of the soul on the subject of
all human mysteries.  Thus it was with Hetty Hutter.  Feeble as
the immaterial portion of her existence was thought to be, it was
sufficiently active to cause her to open her eyes at midnight.  At
that hour she awoke, and leaving her bed of skin and boughs she
walked innocently and openly to the embers of the fire, stirring the
latter, as the coolness of the night and the woods, in connection
with an exceedingly unsophisticated bed, had a little chilled her.
As the flame shot up, it lighted the swarthy countenance of the
Huron on watch, whose dark eyes glistened under its light like
the balls of the panther that is pursued to his den with burning
brands.  But Hetty felt no fear, and she approached the spot where
the Indian stood.  Her movements were so natural, and so perfectly
devoid of any of the stealthiness of cunning or deception, that he
imagined she had merely arisen on account of the coolness of the
night, a common occurrence in a bivouac, and the one of all others,
perhaps, the least likely to excite suspicion.  Hetty spoke to him,
but he understood no English.  She then gazed near a minute at the
sleeping captive, and moved slowly away in a sad and melancholy
manner.  The girl took no pains to conceal her movements.  Any
ingenious expedient of this nature quite likely exceeded her
powers; still her step was habitually light, and scarcely audible.
As she took the direction of the extremity of the point, or the
place where she had landed in the first adventure, and where Hist
had embarked, the sentinel saw her light form gradually disappear
in the gloom without uneasiness or changing his own position.  He
knew that others were on the look-out, and he did not believe that
one who had twice come into the camp voluntarily, and had already
left it openly, would take refuge in flight.  In short, the conduct
of the girl excited no more attention that that of any person of
feeble intellect would excite in civilized society, while her person
met with more consideration and respect.

Hetty certainly had no very distinct notions of the localities,
but she found her way to the beach, which she reached on the same
side of the point as that on which the camp had been made.  By
following the margin of the water, taking a northern direction,
she soon encountered the Indian who paced the strand as sentinel.
This was a young warrior, and when he heard her light tread coming
along the gravel he approached swiftly, though with anything but
menace in his manner.  The darkness was so intense that it was not
easy to discover forms within the shadows of the woods at the distance
of twenty feet, and quite impossible to distinguish persons until
near enough to touch them.  The young Huron manifested disappointment
when he found whom he had met; for, truth to say, he was expecting
his favourite, who had promised to relieve the ennui of a midnight
watch with her presence.  This man was also ignorant of English,
but he was at no loss to understand why the girl should be up at
that hour.  Such things were usual in an Indian village and camp,
where sleep is as irregular as the meals.  Then poor Hetty's known
imbecility, as in most things connected with the savages, stood
her friend on this occasion.  Vexed at his disappointment, and
impatient of the presence of one he thought an intruder, the young
warrior signed for the girl to move forward, holding the direction
of the beach.  Hetty complied; but as she walked away she spoke
aloud in English in her usual soft tones, which the stillness of
the night made audible at some little distance.

"If you took me for a Huron girl, warrior," she said, "I don't
wonder you are so little pleased.  I am Hetty Hutter, Thomas Hutter's
daughter, and have never met any man at night, for mother always
said it was wrong, and modest young women should never do it; modest
young women of the pale-faces, I mean; for customs are different
in different parts of the world, I know.  No, no; I'm Hetty Hutter,
and wouldn't meet even Hurry Harry, though he should fall down on
his knees and ask me!  mother said it was wrong."

By the time Hetty had said this, she reached the place where the
canoes had come ashore, and, owing to the curvature of the land and
the bushes, would have been completely hid from the sight of the
sentinel, had it been broad day.  But another footstep had caught
the lover's ear, and he was already nearly beyond the sound of the
girl's silvery voice.  Still Hetty, bent only on her own thoughts
and purposes, continued to speak, though the gentleness of her tones
prevented the sounds from penetrating far into the woods.  On the
water they were more widely diffused.

"Here I am, Judith," she added, "and there is no one near me.  The
Huron on watch has gone to meet his sweetheart, who is an Indian
girl you know, and never had a Christian mother to tell her how
wrong it is to meet a man at night."

Hetty's voice was hushed by a "Hist!" that came from the water,
and then she caught a dim view of the canoe, which approached
noiselessly, and soon grated on the shingle with its bow.  The
moment the weight of Hetty was felt in the light craft the canoe
withdrew, stern foremost, as if possessed of life and volition,
until it was a hundred yards from the shore.  Then it turned and,
making a wide sweep, as much to prolong the passage as to get
beyond the sound of voices, it held its way towards the ark.  For
several minutes nothing was uttered; but, believing herself to be
in a favourable position to confer with her sister, Judith, who
alone sat in the stern, managing the canoe with a skill little short
of that of a man, began a discourse which she had been burning to
commence ever since they had quitted the point.

"Here we are safe, Hetty," she said, "and may talk without the
fear of being overheard.  You must speak low, however, for sounds
are heard far on the water in a still night.  I was so close to
the point some of the time while you were on it, that I have heard
the voices of the warriors, and I heard your shoes on the gravel
of the beach, even before you spoke."

"I don't believe, Judith, the Hurons know I have left them."

"Quite likely they do not, for a lover makes a poor sentry, unless
it be to watch for his sweetheart!  But tell me, Hetty, did you
see and speak with Deerslayer?"

"Oh, yes - there he was seated near the fire, with his legs tied,
though they left his arms free, to move them as he pleased."

"Well, what did he tell you, child?  Speak quick; I am dying to
know what message he sent me."

"What did he tell me?  why, what do you think, Judith; he told me
that he couldn't read!  Only think of that!  a white man, and not
know how to read his Bible even!  He never could have had a mother,
sister!"

"Never mind that, Hetty.  All men can't read; though mother knew so
much and taught us so much, father knows very little about books,
and he can barely read the Bible you know."

"Oh!  I never thought fathers could read much, but mothers ought
all to read, else how can they teach their children?  Depend on
it, Judith, Deerslayer could never have had a mother, else he would
know how to read."

"Did you tell him I sent you ashore, Hetty, and how much concern
I feel for his misfortune?" asked the other, impatiently.

"I believe I did, Judith; but you know I am feeble-minded, and
I may have forgotten.  I did tell him you brought me ashore.  And
he told me a great deal that I was to say to you, which I remember
well, for it made my blood run cold to hear him.  He told me to
say that his friends - I suppose you are one of them, sister?"

"How can you torment me thus, Hetty!  Certainly, I am one of the
truest friends he has on earth."

"Torment you!  yes, now I remember all about it.  I am glad you
used that word, Judith, for it brings it all back to my mind.  Well,
he said he might be tormented by the savages, but he would try to
bear it as becomes a Christian white man, and that no one need be
afeard - why does Deerslayer call it afeard, when mother always
taught us to say afraid?"

"Never mind, dear Hetty, never mind that, now," cried the other,
almost gasping for breath.  "Did Deerslayer really tell you that he
thought the savages would put him to the torture?  Recollect now,
well, Hetty, for this is a most awful and serious thing."

"Yes he did; and I remember it by your speaking about my tormenting
you.  Oh!  I felt very sorry for him, and Deerslayer took all so
quietly and without noise!  Deerslayer is not as handsome as Hurry
Harry, Judith, but he is more quiet."

"He's worth a million Hurrys!  yes, he's worth all the young men
who ever came upon the lake put together," said Judith, with an
energy and positiveness that caused her sister to wonder.  "He is
true.  There is no lie about Deerslayer.  You, Hetty, may not know
what a merit it is in a man to have truth, but when you get - no
- I hope you will never know it.  Why should one like you be ever
made to learn the hard lesson to distrust and hate!"

Judith bowed her face, dark as it was, and unseen as she must have
been by any eye but that of Omniscience, between her hands, and
groaned.  This sudden paroxysm of feeling, however, lasted but for
a moment, and she continued more calmly, still speaking frankly to
her sister, whose intelligence, and whose discretion in any thing
that related to herself, she did not in the least distrust.  Her
voice, however, was low and husky, instead of having its former
clearness and animation.

"It is a hard thing to fear truth, Hetty," she said, "and yet do I
more dread Deerslayer's truth, than any enemy!  One cannot tamper
with such truth - so much honesty - such obstinate uprightness!
But we are not altogether unequal, sister - Deerslayer and I?  He
is not altogether my superior ?"

It was not usual for Judith so far to demean herself as to appeal
to Hetty's judgment.  Nor did she often address her by the title of
sister, a distinction that is commonly given by the junior to the
senior, even where there is perfect equality in all other respects.
As trifling departures from habitual deportment oftener strike
the imagination than more important changes, Hetty perceived the
circumstances, and wondered at them in her own simple way.  Her
ambition was a little quickened, and the answer was as much out of
the usual course of things as the question; the poor girl attempting
to refine beyond her strength.

"Superior, Judith!" she repeated with pride.  "In what can Deerslayer
be your superior?  Are you not mother's child - and does he know
how to read - and wasn't mother before any woman in all this part
of the world?  I should think, so far from supposing himself your
superior, he would hardly believe himself mine.  You are handsome,
and he is ugly -"

"No, not ugly, Hetty," interrupted Judith.  "Only plain.  But his
honest face has a look in it that is far better than beauty.  In
my eyes, Deerslayer is handsomer than Hurry Harry."

"Judith Hutter!  you frighten me.  Hurry is the handsomest mortal
in the world - even handsomer than you are yourself; because a
man's good looks, you know, are always better than a woman's good
looks."

This little innocent touch of natural taste did not please the
elder sister at the moment, and she did not scruple to betray it.
"Hetty, you now speak foolishly, and had better say no more on
this subject," she answered.  "Hurry is not the handsomest mortal
in the world, by many; and there are officers in the garrisons - "
Judith stammered at the words - "there are officers in the garrisons,
near us, far comelier than he.  But why do you think me the equal
of Deerslayer - speak of that, for I do not like to hear you show
so much admiration of a man like Hurry Harry, who has neither
feelings, manners, nor conscience.  You are too good for him, and
he ought to be told it, at once."

"I!  Judith, how you forget!  Why I am not beautiful, and am
feeble-minded."

"You are good, Hetty, and that is more than can be said of Henry
March.  He may have a face, and a body, but he has no heart.  But
enough of this, for the present.  Tell me what raises me to an
equality with Deerslayer."

"To think of you asking me this, Judith!  He can't read, and you
can.  He don't know how to talk, but speaks worse than Hurry even;
- for, sister, Harry doesn't always pronounce his words right!  Did
you ever notice that?"

"Certainly, he is as coarse in speech as in everything else.  But
I fear you flatter me, Hetty, when you think I can be justly called
the equal of a man like Deerslayer.  It is true, I have been better
taught; in one sense am more comely; and perhaps might look higher;
but then his truth - his truth -makes a fearful difference between
us!  Well, I will talk no more of this; and we will bethink us of
the means of getting him out of the hands of the Hurons.  We have
father's chest in the ark, Hetty, and might try the temptation of
more elephants; though I fear such baubles will not buy the liberty
of a man like Deerslayer.  I am afraid father and Hurry will not be
as willing to ransom Deerslayer, as Deerslayer was to ransom them!"

"Why not, Judith?  Hurry and Deerslayer are friends, and friends
should always help one another."

"Alas!  poor Hetty, you little know mankind!  Seeming friends are
often more to be dreaded than open enemies; particularly by females.
But you'll have to land in the morning, and try again what can be
done for Deerslayer.  Tortured he shall not be, while Judith Hutter
lives, and can find means to prevent it."

The conversation now grew desultory, and was drawn out, until the
elder sister had extracted from the younger every fact that the
feeble faculties of the latter permitted her to retain, and to
communicate.  When Judith was satisfied - though she could never
be said to be satisfied, whose feelings seemed to be so interwoven
with all that related to the subject, as to have excited a nearly
inappeasable curiosity - but, when Judith could think of no more
questions to ask, without resorting to repetition, the canoe was
paddled towards the scow.  The intense darkness of the night, and
the deep shadows which the hills and forest cast upon the water,
rendered it difficult to find the vessel, anchored, as it had
been, as close to the shore as a regard to safety rendered prudent.
Judith was expert in the management of a bark canoe, the lightness
of which demanded skill rather than strength; and she forced her
own little vessel swiftly over the water, the moment she had ended
her conference with Hetty, and had come to the determination to
return.  Still no ark was seen.  Several times the sisters fancied
they saw it, looming up in the obscurity, like a low black rock;
but on each occasion it was found to be either an optical illusion,
or some swell of the foliage on the shore.  After a search that lasted
half an hour, the girls were forced to the unwelcome conviction
that the ark had departed.  Most young women would have felt
the awkwardness of their situation, in a physical sense, under
the circumstances in which the sisters were left, more than any
apprehensions of a different nature.  Not so with Judith, however;
and even Hetty felt more concern about the motives that might have
influenced her father and Hurry, than any fears for her own safety.

"It cannot be, Hetty," said Judith, when a thorough search had
satisfied them both that no ark was to be found; "it cannot be that
the Indians have rafted, or swum off and surprised our friends as
they slept?"

"I don't believe that Hist and Chingachgook would sleep until they
had told each other all they had to say after so long a separation
- do you, sister?"

"Perhaps not, child.  There was much to keep them awake, but one
Indian may have been surprised even when not asleep, especially as
his thoughts may have been on other things.  Still we should have
heard a noise; for in a night like this, an oath of Hurry Harry's
would have echoed in the eastern hills like a clap of thunder."

"Hurry is sinful and thoughtless about his words, Judith," Hetty
meekly and sorrowfully answered.

"No - no; 'tis impossible the ark could be taken and I not hear
the noise.  It is not an hour since I left it, and the whole time
I have been attentive to the smallest sound.  And yet, it is not
easy to believe a father would willingly abandon his children!"

"Perhaps father has thought us in our cabin asleep, Judith, and
has moved away to go home.  You know we often move the ark in the
night."

"This is true, Hetty, and it must be as you suppose.  There is a
little more southern air than there was, and they have gone up the
lake -" Judith stopped, for, as the last word was on her tongue,
the scene was suddenly lighted, though only for a single instant,
by a flash.  The crack of a rifle succeeded, and then followed the
roll of the echo along the eastern mountains.  Almost at the same
moment a piercing female cry rose in the air in a prolonged shriek.
The awful stillness that succeeded was, if possible, more appalling
than the fierce and sudden interruption of the deep silence of
midnight.  Resolute as she was both by nature and habit, Judith
scarce breathed, while poor Hetty hid her face and trembled.

"That was a woman's cry, Hetty," said the former solemnly, 'and it
was a cry of anguish!  If the ark has moved from this spot it can
only have gone north with this air, and the gun and shriek came
from the point.  Can any thing have befallen Hist?"

"Let us go and see, Judith; she may want our assistance - for,
besides herself, there are none but men in the ark."

It was not a moment for hesitation, and ere Judith had ceased
speaking her paddle was in the water.  The distance to the point,
in a direct line, was not great, and the impulses under which the
girls worked were too exciting to allow them to waste the precious
moments in useless precautions.  They paddled incautiously for them,
but the same excitement kept others from noting their movements.
Presently a glare of light caught the eye of Judith through
an opening in the bushes, and steering by it, she so directed the
canoe as to keep it visible, while she got as near the land as was
either prudent or necessary.

The scene that was now presented to the observation of the
girls was within the woods, on the side of the declivity so often
mentioned, and in plain view from the boat.  Here all in the camp
were collected, some six or eight carrying torches of fat-pine,
which cast a strong but funereal light on all beneath the arches of
the forest.  With her back supported against a tree, and sustained
on one side by the young sentinel whose remissness had suffered
Hetty to escape, sat the female whose expected visit had produced
his delinquency.  By the glare of the torch that was held near her
face, it was evident that she was in the agonies of death, while
the blood that trickled from her bared bosom betrayed the nature
of the injury she had received.  The pungent, peculiar smell
of gunpowder, too, was still quite perceptible in the heavy, damp
night air.  There could be no question that she had been shot.
Judith understood it all at a glance.  The streak of light had
appeared on the water a short distance from the point, and either the
rifle had been discharged from a canoe hovering near the land, or
it had been fired from the ark in passing.  An incautious exclamation,
or laugh, may have produced the assault, for it was barely possible
that the aim had been assisted by any other agent than sound.  As
to the effect, that was soon still more apparent, the head of
the victim dropping, and the body sinking in death.  Then all the
torches but one were extinguished - a measure of prudence; and
the melancholy train that bore the body to the camp was just to be
distinguished by the glimmering light that remained.  Judith sighed
heavily and shuddered, as her paddle again dipped, and the canoe
moved cautiously around the point.  A sight had afflicted her senses,
and now haunted her imagination, that was still harder to be borne,
than even the untimely fate and passing agony of the deceased girl.

She had seen, under the strong glare of all the torches, the erect
form of Deerslayer, standing with commiseration, and as she thought,
with shame depicted on his countenance, near the dying female.  He
betrayed neither fear nor backwardness himself; but it was apparent
by the glances cast at him by the warriors, that fierce passions
were struggling in their bosoms.  All this seemed to be unheeded
by the captive, but it remained impressed on the memory of Judith
throughout the night.  No canoe was met hovering near the point.
A stillness and darkness, as complete as if the silence of the
forest had never been disturbed, or the sun had never shone on that
retired region, now reigned on the point, and on the gloomy water,
the slumbering woods, and even the murky sky.  No more could be
done, therefore, than to seek a place of safety; and this was only
to be found in the centre of the lake.  Paddling in silence to that
spot, the canoe was suffered to drift northerly, while the girls
sought such repose as their situation and feelings would permit.



Chapter XIX


"Stand to your arms, and guard the door- all's lost Unless that
fearful bell be silenced soon.  The officer hath miss'd his path,
or purpose, Or met some unforeseen and hideous obstacle.  Anselmo,
with thy company proceed Straight to the tower; the rest remain
with me."

Byron, Marino Faliero, lV.ii.23o-35.

The conjecture of Judith Hutter, concerning the manner in which
the Indian girl had met her death, was accurate in the main.  After
sleeping several hours, her father and March awoke.  This occurred
a few minutes after she had left the Ark to go in quest of her
sister, and when of course Chingachgook and his betrothed were
on board.  From the Delaware the old man learned the position
of the camp, and the recent events, as well as the absence of his
daughters.  The latter gave him no concern, for he relied greatly
on the sagacity of the elder, and the known impunity with which the
younger passed among the savages.  Long familiarity with danger,
too, had blunted his sensibilities.  Nor did he seem much to regret
the captivity of Deerslayer, for, while he knew how material his
aid might be in a defence, the difference in their views on the
morality of the woods, had not left much sympathy between them.  He
would have rejoiced to know the position of the camp before it had
been alarmed by the escape of Hist, but it would be too hazardous
now to venture to land, and he reluctantly relinquished for the
night the ruthless designs that cupidity and revenge had excited
him to entertain.  In this mood Hutter took a seat in the head of
the scow, where he was quickly joined by Hurry, leaving the Serpent
and Hist in quiet possession of the other extremity of the vessel.

"Deerslayer has shown himself a boy, in going among the savages at
this hour, and letting himself fall into their hands like a deer
that tumbles into a pit," growled the old man, perceiving as usual
the mote in his neighbor's eyes, while he overlooked the beam in
his own; "if he is left to pay for his stupidity with his own flesh,
he can blame no one but himself."

"That's the way of the world, old Tom," returned Hurry.  "Every man
must meet his own debts, and answer for his own sins.  I'm amazed,
howsever, that a lad as skilful and watchful as Deerslayer should
have been caught in such a trap!  Didn't he know any better than
to go prowling about a Huron camp at midnight, with no place to
retreat to but a lake?  or did he think himself a buck, that by
taking to the water could throw off the scent and swim himself out
of difficulty?  I had a better opinion of the boy's judgment, I'll
own; but we must overlook a little ignorance in a raw hand.  I say,
Master Hutter, do you happen to know what has become of the gals
- I see no signs of Judith, or Hetty, though I've been through the
Ark, and looked into all its living creatur's."

Hutter briefly explained the manner in which his daughters had
taken to the canoe, as it had been related by the Delaware, as well
as the return of Judith after landing her sister, and her second
departure.

"This comes of a smooth tongue, Floating Tom," exclaimed Hurry,
grating his teeth in pure resentment - "This comes of a smooth
tongue, and a silly gal's inclinations, and you had best look into
the matter!  You and I were both prisoners - Hurry could recall that
circumstance now - "you and I were both prisoners and yet Judith
never stirred an inch to do us any sarvice!  She is bewitched with
this lank-looking Deerslayer, and he, and she, and you, and all
of us, had best look to it.  I am not a man to put up with such
a wrong quietly, and I say, all the parties had best look to it!
Let's up kedge, old fellow, and move nearer to this p'int, and see
how matters are getting on.

Hutter had no objections to this movement, and the Ark was got
under way in the usual manner; care being taken to make no noise.
The wind was passing northward, and the sail soon swept the scow so
far up the lake as to render the dark outlines of the trees that
clothed the point dimly visible.  Floating Tom steered, and he
sailed along as near the land as the depth of the water and the
overhanging branches would allow.  It was impossible to distinguish
anything that stood within the shadows of the shore, but the forms
of the sail and of the hut were discerned by the young sentinel on
the beach, who has already been mentioned.  In the moment of sudden
surprise, a deep Indian exclamation escaped him.  In that spirit
of recklessness and ferocity that formed the essence of Hurry's
character, this man dropped his rifle and fired.  The ball was
sped by accident, or by that overruling providence which decides
the fates of all, and the girl fell.  Then followed the scene with
the torches, which has just been described.

At the precise moment when Hurry committed this act of unthinking
cruelty, the canoe of Judith was within a hundred feet of the spot
from which the Ark had so lately moved.  Her own course has been
described, and it has now become our office to follow that of her
father and his companions.  The shriek announced the effects of
the random shot of March, and it also proclaimed that the victim
was a woman.  Hurry himself was startled at these unlooked for
consequences, and for a moment he was sorely disturbed by conflicting
sensations.  At first he laughed, in reckless and rude-minded
exultation; and then conscience, that monitor planted in our breasts
by God, and which receives its more general growth from the training
bestowed in the tillage of childhood, shot a pang to his heart.
For a minute, the mind of this creature equally of civilization and
of barbarism, was a sort of chaos as to feeling, not knowing what
to think of its own act; and then the obstinacy and pride of one of
his habits, interposed to assert their usual ascendency.  He struck
the butt of his rifle on the bottom of the scow, with a species of
defiance, and began to whistle a low air with an affectation of
indifference.  All this time the Ark was in motion, and it was already
opening the bay above the point, and was consequently quitting the
land.

Hurry's companions did not view his conduct with the same indulgence
as that with which he appeared disposed to regard it himself.  Hutter
growled out his dissatisfaction, for the act led to no advantage,
while it threatened to render the warfare more vindictive than
ever, and none censure motiveless departures from the right more
severely than the mercenary and unprincipled.  Still he commanded
himself, the captivity of Deerslayer rendering the arm of the offender
of double consequence to him at that moment.  Chingachgook arose,
and for a single instant the ancient animosity of tribes was
forgotten, in a feeling of colour; but he recollected himself in
season to prevent any of the fierce consequences that, for a passing
moment, he certainly meditated.  Not so with Hist.  Rushing through
the hut, or cabin, the girl stood at the side of Hurry, almost
as soon as his rifle touched the bottom of the scow, and with
a fearlessness that did credit to her heart, she poured out her
reproaches with the generous warmth of a woman.

"What for you shoot?" she said.  "What Huron gal do, dat you kill
him?  What you t'ink Manitou say?  What you t'ink Manitou feel?
What Iroquois do?  No get honour- no get camp - no get prisoner -no
get battle - no get scalp - no get not'ing at all!  Blood come
after blood!  How you feel, your wife killed?  Who pity you, when
tear come for moder, or sister?  You big as great pine - Huron
gal little slender birch - why you fall on her and crush her?  You
t'ink Huron forget it?  No; red-skin never forget!  Never forget
friend; never forget enemy.  Red man Manitou in dat.  Why you so
wicked, great pale-face?"

Hurry had never been so daunted as by this close and warm attack
of the Indian girl.  It is true that she had a powerful ally in
his conscience, and while she spoke earnestly, it was in tones so
feminine as to deprive him of any pretext for unmanly anger.  The
softness of her voice added to the weight of her remonstrance, by
lending to the latter an air of purity and truth.  Like most vulgar
minded men, he had only regarded the Indians through the medium
of their coarser and fiercer characteristics.  It had never struck
him that the affections are human, that even high principles -
modified by habits and prejudices, but not the less elevated within
their circle - can exist in the savage state, and that the warrior
who is most ruthless in the field, can submit to the softest and
gentlest influences in the moments of domestic quiet.  In a word,
it was the habit of his mind to regard all Indians as being only a
slight degree removed from the wild beasts that roamed the woods,
and to feel disposed to treat them accordingly, whenever interest
or caprice supplied a motive or an impulse.  Still, though daunted
by these reproaches, the handsome barbarian could hardly be said
to be penitent.  He was too much rebuked by conscience to suffer
an outbreak of temper to escape him, and perhaps he felt that he
had already committed an act that might justly bring his manhood
in question.  Instead of resenting, or answering the simple but
natural appeal of Hist, he walked away, like one who disdained
entering into a controversy with a woman.

In the mean while the Ark swept onward, and by the time the scene
with the torches was enacting beneath the trees, it had reached the
open lake, Floating Tom causing it to sheer further from the land
with a sort of instinctive dread of retaliation.  An hour now
passed in gloomy silence, no one appearing disposed to break it.
Hist had retired to her pallet, and Chingachgook lay sleeping in the
forward part of the scow.  Hutter and Hurry alone remained awake,
the former at the steering oar, while the latter brooded over his own
conduct, with the stubbornness of one little given to a confession
of his errors, and the secret goadings of the worm that never dies.
This was at the moment when Judith and Hetty reached the centre of
the lake, and had lain down to endeavor to sleep in their drifting
canoe.

The night was calm, though so much obscured by clouds.  The season
was not one of storms, and those which did occur in the month of
June, on that embedded water, though frequently violent were always
of short continuance.  Nevertheless, there was the usual current
of heavy, damp night air, which, passing over the summits of the
trees, scarcely appeared to descend as low as the surface of the
glassy lake, but kept moving a short distance above it, saturated with
the humidity that constantly arose from the woods, and apparently
never proceeding far in any one direction.  The currents were
influenced by the formation of the hills, as a matter of course, a
circumstance that rendered even fresh breezes baffling, and which
reduced the feebler efforts of the night air to be a sort of capricious
and fickle sighings of the woods.  Several times the head of the
Ark pointed east, and once it was actually turned towards the south,
again; but, on the whole, it worked its way north; Hutter making
always a fair wind, if wind it could be called, his principal motive
appearing to keep in motion, in order to defeat any treacherous
design of his enemies.  He now felt some little concern about his
daughters, and perhaps as much about the canoe; but, on the whole,
this uncertainty did not much disturb him, as he had the reliance
already mentioned on the intelligence of Judith.

It was the season of the shortest nights, and it was not long
before the deep obscurity which precedes the day began to yield to
the returning light.  If any earthly scene could be presented to
the senses of man that might soothe his passions and temper his
ferocity, it was that which grew upon the eyes of Hutter and Hurry
as the hours advanced, changing night to morning.  There were the
usual soft tints of the sky, in which neither the gloom of darkness
nor the brilliancy of the sun prevails, and under which objects
appear more unearthly, and we might add holy, than at any other
portion of the twenty four hours.  The beautiful and soothing calm
of eventide has been extolled by a thousand poets, and yet it does
not bring with it the far-reaching and sublime thoughts of the half
hour that precedes the rising of a summer sun.  In the one case the
panorama is gradually hid from the sight, while in the other its
objects start out from the unfolding picture, first dim and misty;
then marked in, in solemn background; next seen in the witchery of
an increasing, a thing as different as possible from the decreasing
twilight, and finally mellow, distinct and luminous, as the rays
of the great centre of light diffuse themselves in the atmosphere.
The hymns of birds, too, have no moral counterpart in the retreat
to the roost, or the flight to the nest, and these invariably accompany
the advent of the day, until the appearance of the sun itself -

"Bathes in deep joy, the land and sea."

All this, however, Hutter and Hurry witnessed without experiencing
any of that calm delight which the spectacle is wont to bring, when
the thoughts are just and the aspirations pure.  They not only
witnessed it, but they witnessed it under circumstances that had a
tendency to increase its power, and to heighten its charms.  Only
one solitary object became visible in the returning light that had
received its form or uses from human taste or human desires, which
as often deform as beautify a landscape.  This was the castle,
all the rest being native, and fresh from the hand of God.  That
singular residence, too, was in keeping with the natural objects
of the view, starting out from the gloom, quaint, picturesque and
ornamental.  Nevertheless the whole was lost on the observers, who
knew no feeling of poetry, had lost their sense of natural devotion
in lives of obdurate and narrow selfishness, and had little other
sympathy with nature, than that which originated with her lowest
wants.

As soon as the light was sufficiently strong to allow of a distinct
view of the lake, and more particularly of its shores, Hutter turned
the head of the Ark directly towards the castle, with the avowed
intention of taking possession, for the day at least, as the place
most favorable for meeting his daughters and for carrying on his
operations against the Indians.  By this time, Chingachgook was
up, and Hist was heard stirring among the furniture of the kitchen.
The place for which they steered was distant only a mile, and the air
was sufficiently favorable to permit it to be reached by means of
the sail.  At this moment, too, to render the appearances generally
auspicious, the canoe of Judith was seen floating northward in the
broadest part of the lake; having actually passed the scow in the
darkness, in obedience to no other power than that of the elements.
Hutter got his glass, and took a long and anxious survey,
to ascertain if his daughters were in the light craft or not, and
a slight exclamation like that of joy escaped him, as he caught a
glimpse of what he rightly conceived to be a part of Judith's dress
above the top of the canoe.  At the next instant the girl arose
and was seen gazing about her, like one assuring herself of her
situation.  A minute later, Hetty was seen on her knees in the
other end of the canoe, repeating the prayers that had been taught
her in childhood by a misguided but repentant mother.  As Hutter
laid down the glass, still drawn to its focus, the Serpent raised
it to his eye and turned it towards the canoe.  It was the first
time he had ever used such an instrument, and Hist understood by
his "hugh!," the expression of his face, and his entire mien, that
something wonderful had excited his admiration.  It is well known
that the American Indians, more particularly those of superior
characters and stations, singularly maintain their self-possession
and stoicism, in the midst of the flood of marvels that present
themselves in their occasional visits to the abodes of civilization,
and Chingachgook had imbibed enough of this impassibility to suppress
any very undignified manifestation of surprise.  With Hist, however,
no such law was binding, and when her lover managed to bring the
glass in a line with the canoe, and her eye was applied to the
smaller end, the girl started back in alarm; then she clapped her
hands with delight, and a laugh, the usual attendant of untutored
admiration, followed.  A few minutes sufficed to enable this quick
witted girl to manage the instrument for herself, and she directed
it at every prominent object that struck her fancy.  Finding
a rest in one of the windows, she and the Delaware first surveyed
the lake; then the shores, the hills, and, finally, the castle
attracted their attention.  After a long steady gaze at the latter,
Hist took away her eye, and spoke to her lover in a low, earnest
manner.  Chingachgook immediately placed his eye to the glass, and
his look even exceeded that of his betrothed in length and intensity.
Again they spoke together, confidentially, appearing to compare
opinions, after which the glass was laid aside, and the young
warrior quitted the cabin to join Hutter and Hurry.

The Ark was slowly but steadily advancing, and the castle was
materially within half a mile, when Chingachgook joined the two
white men in the stern of the scow.  His manner was calm, but it
was evident to the others, who were familiar with the habits of the
Indians, that he had something to communicate.  Hurry was generally
prompt to speak and, according to custom, he took the lead on this
occasion.

"Out with it, red-skin," he cried, in his usual rough manner.  "Have
you discovered a chipmunk in a tree, or is there a salmon-trout
swimming under the bottom of the scow?  You find what a pale-face
can do in the way of eyes, now, Sarpent, and mustn't wonder that
they can see the land of the Indians from afar off."

"No good to go to Castle," put in Chingachgook with emphasis,
the moment the other gave him an opportunity of speaking.  "Huron
there."

"The devil he is!  - If this should turn out to be true, Floating
Tom, a pretty trap were we about to pull down on our heads!  Huron,
there!  -Well, this may be so; but no signs can I see of any thing,
near or about the old hut, but logs, water, and bark - bating two
or three windows, and one door."

Hutter called for the glass, and took a careful survey of the spot,
before he ventured an opinion, at all; then he somewhat cavalierly
expressed his dissent from that given by the Indian.

"You've got this glass wrong end foremost, Delaware," continued
Hurry.  "Neither the old man nor I can see any trail in the lake."

"No trail - water make no trail," said Hist, eagerly.  "Stop
boat - no go too near.  Huron there!  "

"Ay, that's it!  - Stick to the same tale, and more people
will believe  you.  I hope, Sarpent, you and your gal will agree
in telling the same story arter marriage, as well as you do now.
'Huron, there!'-Whereabouts is he to be seen - in the padlock, or the
chains, or the logs.  There isn't a gaol in the colony that has
a more lock up look a