bout it, than old Tom's chiente, and
I know something about gaols from exper'ence.  "

"No see moccasin," said Hist, impatiently "why no look - and see
him."

"Give me the glass, Harry," interrupted Hutter, "and lower the sail.
It is seldom that an Indian woman meddles, and when she does, there
is generally a cause for it.  There is, truly, a moccasin floating
against one of the piles, and it may or may not be a sign that
the castle hasn't escaped visitors in our absence.  Moccasins are
no rarities, however, for I wear 'em myself; and Deerslayer wears
'em, and you wear 'em, March, and, for that matter so does Hetty,
quite as often as she wears shoes, though I never yet saw Judith
trust her pretty foot in a moccasin."

Hurry had lowered the sail, and by this time the Ark was within two
hundred yards of the castle, setting in, nearer and nearer, each
moment, but at a rate too slow to excite any uneasiness.  Each now
took the glass in turn, and the castle, and every thing near it,
was subjected to a scrutiny still more rigid than ever.  There the
moccasin lay, beyond a question, floating so lightly, and preserving
its form so well, that it was scarcely wet.  It had caught by
a piece of the rough bark of one of the piles, on the exterior of
the water-palisade that formed the dock already mentioned, which
circumstance alone prevented it from drifting away before the air.
There were many modes, however, of accounting for the presence
of the moccasin, without supposing it to have been dropped by an
enemy.  It might have fallen from the platform, even while Hutter
was in possession of the place, and drifted to the spot where it was
now seen, remaining unnoticed until detected by the acute vision
of Hist.  It might have drifted from a distance, up or down the
lake, and accidentally become attached to the pile, or palisade.
It might have been thrown from a window, and alighted in that
particular place; or it might certainly have fallen from a scout,
or an assailant, during the past night, who was obliged to abandon
it to the lake, in the deep obscurity which then prevailed.

All these conjectures passed from Hutter to Hurry, the former
appearing disposed to regard the omen as a little sinister, while
the latter treated it with his usual reckless disdain.  As for the
Indian, he was of opinion that the moccasin should be viewed as
one would regard a trail in the woods, which might, or might not,
equally, prove to be threatening.  Hist, however, had something
available to propose.  She declared her readiness to take a canoe,
to proceed to the palisade and bring away the moccasin, when its
ornaments would show whether it came from the Canadas or not.  Both
the white men were disposed to accept this offer, but the Delaware
interfered to prevent the risk.  If such a service was to be undertaken,
it best became a warrior to expose himself in its execution, and
he gave his refusal to let his betrothed proceed, much in the quiet
but brief manner in which an Indian husband issues his commands.

"Well then, Delaware, go yourself if you're so tender of your
squaw,"  put in the unceremonious Hurry.  "That moccasin must be
had, or Floating Tom will keep off, here, at arm's length, till
the hearth cools in his cabin.  It's but a little deerskin, a'ter
all, and cut this-a-way or that-a-way, it's not a skear-crow
to frighten true hunters from their game.  What say you, Sarpent,
shall you or I canoe it?"

"Let red man go.  - Better eyes than pale-face - know Huron trick
better, too."

"That I'll gainsay, to the hour of my death!  A white man's eyes,
and a white man's nose, and for that matter his sight and ears are
all better than an Injin's when fairly tried.  Time and ag'in have
I put that to the proof, and what is proved is sartain.  Still I
suppose the poorest vagabond going, whether Delaware or Huron, can
find his way to yonder hut and back ag'in, and so, Sarpent, use
your paddle and welcome."

Chingachgook was already in the canoe, and he dipped the implement
the other named into the water, just as Hurry's limber tongue ceased.
Wah-ta-Wah saw the departure of her warrior on this occasion with
the submissive silence of an Indian girl, but with most of the
misgivings and apprehensions of her sex.  Throughout the whole of
the past night, and down to the moment, when they used the glass
together in the hut, Chingachgook had manifested as much manly
tenderness towards his betrothed as one of the most refined sentiment
could have shown under similar circumstances, but now every sign of
weakness was lost in an appearance of stern resolution.  Although
Hist timidly endeavored to catch his eye as the canoe left the side
of the Ark, the pride of a warrior would not permit him to meet
her fond and anxious looks.  The canoe departed and not a wandering
glance rewarded her solicitude.

Nor were the Delaware's care and gravity misplaced, under the
impressions with which he proceeded on this enterprise.  If the
enemy had really gained possession of the building he was obliged
to put himself under the very muzzles of their rifles, as it were,
and this too without the protection of any of that cover which forms
so essential an ally in Indian warfare.  It is scarcely possible
to conceive of a service more dangerous, and had the Serpent been
fortified by the experience of ten more years, or had his friend
the Deerslayer been present, it would never have been attempted;
the advantages in no degree compensating for the risk.  But the
pride of an Indian chief was acted on by the rivalry of colour,
and it is not unlikely that the presence of the very creature from
whom his ideas of manhood prevented his receiving a single glance,
overflowing as he was with the love she so well merited, had no
small influence on his determination.

Chingachgook paddled steadily towards the palisades, keeping his eyes
on the different loops of the building.  Each instant he expected
to see the muzzle of a rifle protruded, or to hear its sharp crack;
but he succeeded in reaching the piles in safety.  Here he was,
in a measure, protected, having the heads of the palisades between
him and the hut, and the chances of any attempt on his life while
thus covered, were greatly diminished.  The canoe had reached the
piles with its head inclining northward, and at a short distance
from the moccasin.  Instead of turning to pick up the latter, the
Delaware slowly made the circuit of the whole building, deliberately
examining every object that should betray the presence of enemies,
or the commission of violence.  Not a single sign could he discover,
however, to confirm the suspicions that had been awakened.  The
stillness of desertion pervaded the building; not a fastening was
displaced, not a window had been broken.  The door looked as secure
as at the hour when it was closed by Hutter, and even the gate
of the dock had all the customary fastenings.  In short, the most
wary and jealous eye could detect no other evidence of the visit
of enemies, than that which was connected with the appearance of
the floating moccasin.

The Delaware was now greatly at a loss how to proceed.  At one
moment, as he came round in front of the castle, he was on the point
of stepping up on the platform and of applying his eye to one of
the loops, with a view of taking a direct personal inspection of
the state of things within; but he hesitated.  Though of little
experience in such matters, himself, he had heard so much of Indian
artifices through traditions, had listened with such breathless
interest to the narration of the escapes of the elder warriors,
and, in short, was so well schooled in the theory of his calling,
that it was almost as impossible for him to make any gross blunder
on such an occasion, as it was for a well grounded scholar, who had
commenced correctly, to fail in solving his problem in mathematics.
Relinquishing the momentary intention to land, the chief slowly
pursued his course round the palisades.  As he approached the
moccasin, having now nearly completed the circuit of the building,
he threw the ominous article into the canoe, by a dexterous and
almost imperceptible movement of his paddle.  He was now ready to
depart, but retreat was even more dangerous than the approach, as
the eye could no longer be riveted on the loops.  If there was really
any one in the castle, the motive of the Delaware in reconnoitering
must be understood, and it was the wisest way, however perilous it
might be, to retire with an air of confidence, as if all distrust
were terminated by the examination.  Such, accordingly, was the
course adopted by the Indian, who paddled deliberately away, taking
the direction of the Ark, suffering no nervous impulse to quicken
the motions of his arms, or to induce him to turn even a furtive
glance behind him.

No tender wife, reared in the refinements of the highest
civilization, ever met a husband on his return from the field with
more of sensibility in her countenance than Hist discovered, as
she saw the Great Serpent of the Delawares step, unharmed, into the
Ark.  Still she repressed her emotion, though the joy that sparkled
in her dark eyes, and the smile that lighted her pretty mouth,
spoke a language that her betrothed could understand.

"Well, Sarpent," cried Hurry, always the first to speak, "what news
from the muskrats?  Did they shew their teeth, as you surrounded
their dwelling?"

"I no like him," sententiously returned the Delaware.  "Too still.
So still, can see silence!"

"That's downright Injin - as if any thing could make less noise
than nothing!  If you've no better reason than this to give, old
Tom had better hoist his sail, and go and get his breakfast under
his own roof.  What has become of the moccasin?"

"Here," returned Chingachgook, holding up his prize for the general
inspection.  The moccasin was examined, and Hist confidently
pronounced it to be Huron, by the manner in which the porcupine's
quills were arranged on its front.  Hutter and the Delaware, too,
were decidedly of the same opinion.  Admitting all this, however,
it did not necessarily follow that its owners were in the castle.
The moccasin might have drifted from a distance, or it might have
fallen from the foot of some scout, who had quitted the place when
his errand was accomplished.  In short it explained nothing, while
it awakened so much distrust.

Under the circumstances, Hutter and Hurry were not men to be long
deterred from proceeding by proofs as slight as that of the moccasin.
They hoisted the sail again, and the Ark was soon in motion,
heading towards the castle.  The wind or air continued light, and
the movement was sufficiently slow to allow of a deliberate survey
of the building, as the scow approached.  The same death-like silence
reigned, and it was difficult to fancy that any thing possessing
animal life could be in or around the place.  Unlike the Serpent,
whose imagination had acted through his traditions until he was
ready to perceive an artificial, in a natural stillness, the others
saw nothing to apprehend in a tranquility that, in truth, merely
denoted the repose of inanimate objects.  The accessories of the
scene, too, were soothing and calm, rather than exciting.  The day
had not yet advanced so far as to bring the sun above the horizon, but
the heavens, the atmosphere, and the woods and lake were all seen
under that softened light which immediately precedes his appearance,
and which perhaps is the most witching period of the four and twenty
hours.  It is the moment when every thing is distinct, even the
atmosphere seeming to possess a liquid lucidity, the hues appearing
gray and softened, with the outlines of objects defined, and
the perspective just as moral truths that are presented in their
simplicity, without the meretricious aids of ornament or glitter.
In a word, it is the moment when the senses seem to recover their
powers, in the simplest and most accurate forms, like the mind
emerging from the obscurity of doubts into the tranquility and peace
of demonstration.  Most of the influence that such a scene is apt
to produce on those who are properly constituted in a moral sense,
was lost on Hutter and Hurry; but both the Delawares, though too
much accustomed to witness the loveliness of morning-tide to stop
to analyze their feelings, were equally sensible of the beauties
of the hour, though it was probably in a way unknown to themselves.
It disposed the young warrior to peace, and never had he felt less
longings for the glory of the combat, than when he joined Hist
in the cabin, the instant the scow rubbed against the side of the
platform.  From the indulgence of such gentle emotions, however,
he was aroused by a rude summons from Hurry, who called on him to
come forth and help to take in the sail, and to secure the Ark.

Chingachgook obeyed, and by the time he had reached the head of
the scow, Hurry was on the platform, stamping his feet, like one
glad to touch what, by comparison, might be called terra firma,
and proclaiming his indifference to the whole Huron tribe in his
customary noisy, dogmatical manner.  Hutter had hauled a canoe up
to the head of the scow, and was already about to undo the fastenings
of the gate, in order to enter within the 'dock.' March had no other
motive in landing than a senseless bravado, and having shaken the
door in a manner to put its solidity to the proof, he joined Hutter
in the canoe and began to aid him in opening the gate.  The reader
will remember that this mode of entrance was rendered necessary by
the manner in which the owner of this singular residence habitually
secured it, whenever it was left empty; more particularly at
moments when danger was apprehended.  Hutter had placed a line in
the Delaware's hand, on entering the canoe, intimating that the
other was to fasten the Ark to the platform and to lower the sail.
Instead of following these directions, however, Chingachgook left
the sail standing, and throwing the bight of the rope over the
head of a pile, he permitted the Ark to drift round until it lay
against the defences, in a position where it could be entered only
by means of a boat, or by passing along the summits of the palisades;
the latter being an exploit that required some command of the feet,
and which was not to be attempted in the face of a resolute enemy.

In consequence of this change in the position of the scow, which
was effected before Hutter had succeeded in opening the gate
of his dock, the Ark and the Castle lay, as sailors would express
it, yard-arm and yard-arm, kept asunder some ten or twelve feet by
means of the piles.  As the scow pressed close against the latter,
their tops formed a species of breast work that rose to the height
of a man's head, covering in a certain degree the parts of the scow
that were not protected by the cabin.  The Delaware surveyed this
arrangement with great satisfaction and, as the canoe of Hutter
passed through the gate into the dock, he thought that he might defend
his position against any garrison in the castle, for a sufficient
time, could he but have had the helping arm of his friend Deerslayer.
As it was, he felt comparatively secure, and no longer suffered
the keen apprehensions he had lately experienced in behalf of Hist.

A single shove sent the canoe from the gate to the trap beneath
the castle.  Here Hutter found all fast, neither padlock nor chain
nor bar having been molested.  The key was produced, the locks
removed, the chain loosened, and the trap pushed upward.  Hurry
now thrust his head in at the opening; the arms followed, and the
colossal legs rose without any apparent effort.  At the next instant,
his heavy foot was heard stamping in the passage above; that which
separated the chambers of the father and daughters, and into which
the trap opened.  He then gave a shout of triumph.

"Come on, old Tom," the reckless woodsman called out from within the
building - "here's your tenement, safe and sound; ay, and as empty
as a nut that has passed half an hour in the paws of a squirrel!
The Delaware brags of being able to see silence; let him come here,
and he may feel it, in the bargain."

"Any silence where you are, Hurry Harry," returned Hutter, thrusting
his head in at the hole as he uttered the last word, which instantly
caused his voice to sound smothered to those without - "Any silence
where you are, ought to be both seen and felt, for it's unlike any
other silence."

"Come, come, old fellow; hoist yourself up, and we'll open doors
and windows and let in the fresh air to brighten up matters.  Few
words in troublesome times, make men the best fri'nds.  Your darter
Judith is what I call a misbehaving young woman, and the hold of
the whole family on me is so much weakened by her late conduct,
that it wouldn't take a speech as long as the ten commandments to
send me off to the river, leaving you and your traps, your Ark and
your children, your man servants and your maid servants, your oxen
and your asses, to fight this battle with the Iroquois by yourselves.
Open that window, Floating Tom, and I'll blunder through and do
the same job to the front door."

A moment of silence succeeded, and a noise like that produced by
the fall of a heavy body followed.  A deep execration from Hurry
succeeded, and then the whole interior of the building seemed alive.
The noises that now so suddenly, and we may add so unexpectedly
even to the Delaware, broke the stillness within, could not be
mistaken.  They resembled those that would be produced by a struggle
between tigers in a cage.  Once or twice the Indian yell was given,
but it seemed smothered, and as if it proceeded from exhausted or
compressed throats, and, in a single instance, a deep and another
shockingly revolting execration came from the throat of Hurry.  It
appeared as if bodies were constantly thrown upon the floor with
violence, as often rising to renew the struggle.  Chingachgook
felt greatly at a loss what to do.  He had all the arms in the Ark,
Hutter and Hurry having proceeded without their rifles, but there
was no means of using them, or of passing them to the hands of their
owners.  The combatants were literally caged, rendering it almost
as impossible under the circumstances to get out, as to get into
the building.  Then there was Hist to embarrass his movements, and
to cripple his efforts.  With a view to relieve himself from this
disadvantage, he told the girl to take the remaining canoe and to
join Hutter's daughters, who were incautiously but deliberately
approaching, in order to save herself, and to warn the others of
their danger.  But the girl positively and firmly refused to comply.
At that moment no human power, short of an exercise of superior
physical force, could have induced her to quit the Ark.  The exigency
of the moment did not admit of delay, and the Delaware seeing no
possibility of serving his friends, cut the line and by a strong
shove forced the scow some twenty feet clear of the piles.  Here
he took the sweeps and succeeded in getting a short distance
to windward, if any direction could be thus termed in so light an
air, but neither the time, nor his skill at the oars, allowed the
distance to be great.  When he ceased rowing, the Ark might have
been a hundred yards from the platform, and half that distance
to the southward of it, the sail being lowered.  Judith and Hetty
had now discovered that something was wrong, and were stationary
a thousand feet farther north.

All this while the furious struggle continued within the house.
In scenes like these, events thicken in less time than they can
be related.  From the moment when the first fall was heard within
the building to that when the Delaware ceased his awkward attempts
to row, it might have been three or four minutes, but it had evidently
served to weaken the combatants.  The oaths and execrations of
Hurry were no longer heard, and even the struggles had lost some
of their force and fury.  Nevertheless they still continued with
unabated perseverance.  At this instant the door flew open, and
the fight was transferred to the platform, the light and the open
air.  A Huron had undone the fastenings of the door, and three or
four of his tribe rushed after him upon the narrow space, as if glad
to escape from some terrible scene within.  The body of another
followed, pitched headlong through the door with terrific violence.
Then March appeared, raging like a lion at bay, and for an instant
freed from his numerous enemies.  Hutter was already a captive and
bound.  There was now a pause in the struggle, which resembled a
lull in a tempest.  The necessity of breathing was common to all,
and the combatants stood watching each other, like mastiffs that
have been driven from their holds, and are waiting for a favorable
opportunity of renewing them.  We shall profit by this pause to
relate the manner in which the Indians had obtained possession of
the castle, and this the more willingly because it may be necessary
to explain to the reader why a conflict which had been so close
and fierce, should have also been so comparatively bloodless.

Rivenoak and his companion, particularly the latter who had appeared
to be a subordinate and occupied solely with his raft, had made
the closest observations in their visits to the castle.  Even the
boy had brought away minute and valuable information.  By these
means the Hurons obtained a general idea of the manner in which
the place was constructed and secured, as well as of details that
enabled them to act intelligently in the dark.  Notwithstanding
the care that Hutter had taken to drop the Ark on the east side of
the building when he was in the act of transferring the furniture
from the former to the latter, he had been watched in a way to
render the precaution useless.  Scouts were on the look-out on the
eastern as well as on the western shore of the lake, and the whole
proceeding had been noted.  As soon as it was dark, rafts like that
already described approached from both shores to reconnoitre, and
the Ark had passed within fifty feet of one of them without its
being discovered; the men it held lying at their length on the
logs, so as to blend themselves and their slow moving machine with
the water.  When these two sets of adventurers drew near the castle
they encountered each other, and after communicating their respective
observations, they unhesitatingly approached the building.  As had
been expected, it was found empty.  The rafts were immediately sent
for a reinforcement to the shore, and two of the savages remained
to profit by their situation.  These men succeeded in getting on
the roof, and by removing some of the bark, in entering what might
be termed the garret.  Here they were found by their companions.
Hatchets now opened a hole through the squared logs of the upper
floor, through which no less than eight of the most athletic of
the Indians dropped into the rooms beneath.  Here they were left,
well supplied with arms and provisions, either to stand a siege, or
to make a sortie, as the case might require.  The night was passed
in sleep, as is usual with Indians in a state of inactivity.  The
returning day brought them a view of the approach of the Ark
through the loops, the only manner in which light and air were now
admitted, the windows being closed most effectually with plank,
rudely fashioned to fit.  As soon as it was ascertained that the two
white men were about to enter by the trap, the chief who directed
the proceedings of the Hurons took his measures accordingly.  He
removed all the arms from his own people, even to the knives, in
distrust of savage ferocity when awakened by personal injuries, and
he hid them where they could not be found without a search.  Ropes
of bark were then prepared, and taking their stations in the three
different rooms, they all waited for the signal to fall upon their
intended captives.  As soon as the party had entered the building,
men without replaced the bark of the roof, removed every sign of
their visit, with care, and then departed for the shore.  It was
one of these who had dropped his moccasin, which he had not been
able to find again in the dark.  Had the death of the girl been
known, it is probable nothing could have saved the lives of Hurry
and Hutter, but that event occurred after the ambush was laid, and
at a distance of several miles from the encampment near the castle.
Such were the means that had been employed to produce the state of
things we shall continue to describe.



Chapter XX


"Now all is done that man can do, And all is done in vain!  My
love!  my native land, adieu For I must cross the main, My dear,
For I must cross the main."

Robert Burns, "It was a' for our Rightfu' King," II.  7-12.

The last chapter we left the combatants breathing in their narrow
lists.  Accustomed to the rude sports of wrestling and jumping,
then so common in America, more especially on the frontiers, Hurry
possessed an advantage, in addition to his prodigious strength,
that had rendered the struggle less unequal than it might otherwise
appear to be.  This alone had enabled him to hold out so long,
against so many enemies, for the Indian is by no means remarkable
for his skill, or force, in athletic exercises.  As yet, no one
had been seriously hurt, though several of the savages had received
severe falls, and he, in particular, who had been thrown bodily
upon the platform, might be said to be temporarily hors de combat.
Some of the rest were limping, and March himself had not entirely
escaped from bruises, though want of breath was the principal loss
that both sides wished to repair.

Under circumstances like those in which the parties were placed, a
truce, let it come from what cause it might, could not well be of
long continuance.  The arena was too confined, and the distrust
of treachery too great, to admit of this.  Contrary to what might
be expected in his situation, Hurry was the first to recommence
hostilities.  Whether this proceeded from policy, an idea that he
might gain some advantage by making a sudden and unexpected assault,
or was the fruit of irritation and his undying hatred of an Indian,
it is impossible to say.  His onset was furious, however, and at
first it carried all before it.  He seized the nearest Huron by the
waist, raised him entirely from the platform, and hurled him into
the water, as if he had been a child.  In half a minute, two more
were at his side, one of whom received a grave injury by the friend
who had just preceded him.  But four enemies remained, and, in a
hand to hand conflict, in which no arms were used but those which
nature had furnished, Hurry believed himself fully able to cope
with that number of red-skins.

"Hurrah!  Old Tom," he shouted - "The rascals are taking to the
lake, and I'll soon have 'em all swimming!" As these words were
uttered a violent kick in the face sent back the injured Indian,
who had caught at the edge of the platform, and was endeavoring
to raise himself to its level, helplessly and hopelessly into the
water.  When the affray was over, his dark body was seen, through
the limpid element of the Glimmerglass, lying, with outstretched
arms, extended on the bottom of the shoal on which the Castle stood,
clinging to the sands and weeds, as if life were to be retained by
this frenzied grasp of death.  A blow sent into the pit of another's
stomach doubled him up like a worm that had been trodden on, and
but two able bodied foes remained to be dealt with.  One of these,
however, was not only the largest and strongest of the Hurons, but
he was also the most experienced of their warriors present, and that
one whose sinews were the best strung in fights, and by marches on
the warpath.  This man fully appreciated the gigantic strength of
his opponent, and had carefully husbanded his own.  He was also
equipped in the best manner for such a conflict, standing in nothing
but his breech-cloth, the model of a naked and beautiful statue of
agility and strength.  To grasp him required additional dexterity
and unusual force.  Still Hurry did not hesitate, but the kick that
had actually destroyed one fellow creature was no sooner given, than
he closed in with this formidable antagonist, endeavoring to force
him into the water, also.  The struggle that succeeded was truly
frightful.  So fierce did it immediately become, and so quick and
changeful were the evolutions of the athletes, that the remaining
savage had no chance for interfering, had he possessed the desire;
but wonder and apprehension held him spell bound.  He was an
inexperienced youth, and his blood curdled as he witnessed the fell
strife of human passions, exhibited too, in an unaccustomed form.

Hurry first attempted to throw his antagonist.  With this view he
seized him by the throat, and an arm, and tripped with the quickness
and force of an American borderer.  The effect was frustrated by
the agile movements of the Huron, who had clothes to grasp by, and
whose feet avoided the attempt with a nimbleness equal to that with
which it was made.  Then followed a sort of melee, if such a term
can be applied to a struggle between two in which no efforts were
strictly visible, the limbs and bodies of the combatants assuming
so many attitudes and contortions as to defeat observation.  This
confused but fierce rally lasted less than a minute, however; when,
Hurry, furious at having his strength baffled by the agility and
nakedness of his foe, made a desperate effort, which sent the Huron
from him, hurling his body violently against the logs of the hut.
The concussion was so great as momentarily to confuse the latter's
faculties.  The pain, too, extorted a deep groan; an unusual
concession to agony to escape a red man in the heat of battle.
Still he rushed forward again to meet his enemy, conscious that
his safety rested on it's resolution.  Hurry now seized the other
by the waist, raised him bodily from the platform, and fell with
his own great weight on the form beneath.  This additional shock
so stunned the sufferer, that his gigantic white opponent now had
him completely at his mercy.  Passing his hands around the throat
of his victim, he compressed them with the strength of a vice, fairly
doubling the head of the Huron over the edge of the platform, until
the chin was uppermost, with the infernal strength he expended.
An instant sufficed to show the consequences.  The eyes of the
sufferer seemed to start forward, his tongue protruded, and his
nostrils dilated nearly to splitting.  At this instant a rope of
bark, having an eye, was passed dexterously within the two arms of
Hurry, the end threaded the eye, forming a noose, and his elbows
were drawn together behind his back, with a power that all his
gigantic strength could not resist.  Reluctantly, even under such
circumstances, did the exasperated borderer see his hands drawn
from their deadly grasp, for all the evil passions were then in the
ascendant.  Almost at the same instant a similar fastening secured
his ankles, and his body was rolled to the centre of the platform
as helplessly, and as cavalierly, as if it were a log of wood.
His rescued antagonist, however, did not rise, for while he began
again to breathe, his head still hung helplessly over the edge of
the logs, and it was thought at first that his neck was dislocated.
He recovered gradually only, and it was hours before he could walk.
Some fancied that neither his body, nor his mind, ever totally
recovered from this near approach to death.

Hurry owed his defeat and capture to the intensity with which
he had concentrated all his powers on his fallen foe.  While thus
occupied, the two Indians he had hurled into the water mounted to
the heads of the piles, along which they passed, and joined their
companion on the platform.  The latter had so far rallied his
faculties as to have gotten the ropes, which were in readiness for
use as the others appeared, and they were applied in the manner
related, as Hurry lay pressing his enemy down with his whole weight,
intent only on the horrible office of strangling him.  Thus were
the tables turned, in a single moment; he who had been so near
achieving a victory that would have been renowned for ages, by means
of traditions, throughout all that region, lying helpless, bound
and a captive.  So fearful had been the efforts of the pale-face,
and so prodigious the strength he exhibited, that even as he lay
tethered like a sheep before them, they regarded him with respect,
and not without dread.  The helpless body of their stoutest warrior
was still stretched on the platform, and, as they cast their eyes
towards the lake, in quest of the comrade that had been hurled
into it so unceremoniously, and of whom they had lost sight in the
confusion of the fray, they perceived his lifeless form clinging
to the grass on the bottom, as already described.  These several
circumstances contributed to render the victory of the Hurons almost
as astounding to themselves as a defeat.

Chingachgook and his betrothed witnessed the whole of this struggle
from the Ark.  When the three Hurons were about to pass the cords
around the arms of the prostrate Hurry the Delaware sought his
rifle, but, before he could use it the white man was bound and
the mischief was done.  He might still bring down an enemy, but to
obtain the scalp was impossible, and the young chief, who would so
freely risk his own life to obtain such a trophy, hesitated about
taking that of a foe without such an object in view.  A glance
at Hist, and the recollection of what might follow, checked any
transient wish for revenge.  The reader has been told that Chingachgook
could scarcely be said to know how to manage the oars of the Ark at
all, however expert he might be in the use of the paddle.  Perhaps
there is no manual labor at which men are so bungling and awkward, as
in their first attempts to pull oar, even the experienced mariner,
or boat man, breaking down in his efforts to figure with the
celebrated rullock of the gondolier.  In short it is, temporarily,
an impracticable thing for a new beginner to succeed with a single
oar, but in this case it was necessary to handle two at the same
time, and those of great size.  Sweeps, or large oars, however,
are sooner rendered of use by the raw hand than lighter implements,
and this was the reason that the Delaware had succeeded in moving the
Ark as well as he did in a first trial.  That trial, notwithstanding,
sufficed to produce distrust, and he was fully aware of the critical
situation in which Hist and himself were now placed, should the
Hurons take to the canoe that was still lying beneath the trap, and
come against them.  At the moment he thought of putting Hist into
the canoe in his own possession, and of taking to the eastern
mountain in the hope of reaching the Delaware villages by direct
flight.  But many considerations suggested themselves to put a
stop to this indiscreet step.  It was almost certain that scouts
watched the lake on both sides, and no canoe could possibly approach
shore without being seen from the hills.  Then a trail could not
be concealed from Indian eyes, and the strength of Hist was unequal
to a flight sufficiently sustained to outstrip the pursuit of
trained warriors.  This was a part of America in which the Indians
did not know the use of horses, and everything would depend on
the physical energies of the fugitives.  Last, but far from being
least, were the thoughts connected with the situation of Deerslayer,
a friend who was not to be deserted in his extremity.

Hist in some particulars reasoned, and even felt, differently though
she arrived at the same conclusions.  Her own anger disturbed her
less than her concern for the two sisters, on whose behalf her
womanly sympathies were now strongly enlisted.  The canoe of the
girls, by the time the struggle on the platform had ceased, was
within three hundred yards of the castle, and here Judith ceased
paddling, the evidences of strife first becoming apparent to the
eyes.  She and Hetty were standing erect, anxiously endeavoring
to ascertain what had occurred, but unable to satisfy their doubts
from the circumstance that the building, in a great measure,
concealed the scene of action.

The parties in the Ark, and in the canoe, were indebted to the
ferocity of Hurry's attack for their momentary security.  In any
ordinary case, the girls would have been immediately captured, a
measure easy of execution now the savages had a canoe, were it not
for the rude check the audacity of the Hurons had received in the
recent struggle.  It required some little time to recover from the
effects of this violent scene, and this so much the more, because
the principal man of the party, in the way of personal prowess
at least, had been so great a sufferer.  Still it was of the last
importance that Judith and her sister should seek immediate refuge
in the Ark, where the defences offered a temporary shelter at least,
and the first step was to devise the means of inducing them to do
so.  Hist showed herself in the stern of the scow, and made many
gestures and signs, in vain, in order to induce the girls to make
a circuit to avoid the Castle, and to approach the Ark from the
eastward.  But these signs were distrusted or misunderstood.  It
is probable Judith was not yet sufficiently aware of the real state
of things to put full confidence in either party.  Instead of doing
as desired, she rather kept more aloof, paddling slowly back to
the north, or into the broadest part of the lake, where she could
command the widest view, and had the fairest field for flight
before her.  At this instant the sun appeared above the pines of
the eastern range of mountains and a light southerly breeze arose,
as was usual enough at that season and hour.  Chingachgook lost no
time in hoisting the sail.  Whatever might be in reserve for him,
there could be no question that it was every way desirable to get
the Ark at such a distance from the castle as to reduce his enemies
to the necessity of approaching the former in the canoe, which the
chances of war had so inopportunely, for his wishes and security,
thrown into their hands.  The appearance of the opening duck seemed
first to arouse the Hurons from their apathy, and by the time
the head of the scow had fallen off before the wind, which it did
unfortunately in the wrong direction, bringing it within a few yards
of the platform, Hist found it necessary to warn her lover of the
importance of covering his person against the rifles of his foes.
This was a danger to be avoided under all circumstances, and so
much the more, because the Delaware found that Hist would not take
to the cover herself so long as he remained exposed.  Accordingly,
Chingachgook abandoned the scow to its own movements, forced Hist
into the cabin, the doors of which he immediately secured, and then
he looked about him for the rifles.  The situation of the parties
was now so singular as to merit a particular description.  The Ark
was within sixty yards of the castle, a little to the southward,
or to windward of it, with its sail full, and the steering oar
abandoned.  The latter, fortunately, was loose, so that it produced
no great influence on the crab like movements of the unwieldy craft.
The sail being as sailors term it, flying, or having no braces,
the air forced the yard forward, though both sheets were fast.  The
effect was threefold on a boat with a bottom that was perfectly
flat, and which drew merely some three or four inches water.  It
pressed the head slowly round to leeward, it forced the whole fabric
bodily in the same direction at the same time, and the water that
unavoidably gathered under the lee gave the scow also a forward
movement.  All these changes were exceedingly slow, however, for
the wind was not only light, but it was baffling as usual, and
twice or thrice the sail shook.  Once it was absolutely taken aback.

Had there been any keel to the Ark, it would inevitably have run
foul of the platform, bows on, when it is probable nothing could
have prevented the Hurons from carrying it; more particularly as
the sail would have enabled them to approach under cover.  As it
was, the scow wore slowly round, barely clearing that part of the
building.  The piles projecting several feet, they were not cleared,
but the head of the slow moving craft caught between two of them,
by one of its square corners, and hung.  At this moment the Delaware
was vigilantly watching through a loop for an opportunity to fire,
while the Hurons kept within the building, similarly occupied.
The exhausted warrior reclined against the hut, there having been
no time to remove him, and Hurry lay, almost as helpless as a log,
tethered like a sheep on its way to the slaughter, near the middle
of the platform.  Chingachgook could have slain the first, at any
moment, but his scalp would have been safe, and the young chief
disdained to strike a blow that could lead to neither honor nor
advantage.

"Run out one of the poles, Sarpent, if Sarpent you be," said Hurry,
amid the groans that the tightness of the ligatures was beginning
to extort from him - "run out one of the poles, and shove the head
of the scow off, and you'll drift clear of us - and, when you've
done that good turn for yourself just finish this gagging blackguard
for me."

The appeal of Hurry, however, had no other effect than to draw the
attention of Hist to his situation.  This quick witted creature
comprehended it at a glance.  His ankles were bound with several
turns of stout bark rope, and his arms, above the elbows, were
similarly secured behind his back; barely leaving him a little play
of the hands and wrists.  Putting her mouth near a loop she said
in a low but distinct voice - "Why you don't roll here, and fall
in scow?  Chingachgook shoot Huron, if he chase!"

"By the Lord, gal, that's a judgematical thought, and it shall be
tried, if the starn of your scow will come a little nearer.  Put
a bed at the bottom, for me to fall on."

This was said at a happy moment, for, tired of waiting, all the
Indians made a rapid discharge of their rifles, almost simultaneously,
injuring no one; though several bullets passed through the loops.
Hist had heard part of Hurry's words, but most of what he said was
lost in the sharp reports of the firearms.  She undid the bar of
the door that led to the stern of the scow, but did not dare to
expose her person.  All this time, the head of the Ark hung, but
by a gradually decreasing hold as the other end swung slowly round,
nearer and nearer to the platform.  Hurry, who now lay with his
face towards the Ark, occasionally writhing and turning over like
one in pain, evolutions he had performed ever since he was secured,
watched every change, and, at last, he saw that the whole vessel
was free, and was beginning to grate slowly along the sides of the
piles.  The attempt was desperate, but it seemed to be the only
chance for escaping torture and death, and it suited the reckless
daring of the man's character.  Waiting to the last moment, in order
that the stern of the scow might fairly rub against the platform,
he began to writhe again, as if in intolerable suffering, execrating
all Indians in general, and the Hurons in particular, and then he
suddenly and rapidly rolled over and over, taking the direction of
the stern of the scow.  Unfortunately, Hurry's shoulders required
more space to revolve in than his feet, and by the time he reached the
edge of the platform his direction had so far changed as to carry
him clear of the Ark altogether, and the rapidity of his revolutions
and the emergency admitting of no delay, he fell into the water.  At
this instant, Chingachgook, by an understanding with his betrothed,
drew the fire of the Hurons again, not a man of whom saw the
manner in which one whom they knew to be effectually tethered,
had disappeared.  But Hist 's feelings were strongly interested in
the success of so bold a scheme, and she watched the movements of
Hurry as the cat watches the mouse.  The moment he was in motion
she foresaw the consequences, and this the more readily, as the scow
was now beginning to move with some steadiness, and she bethought
her of the means of saving him.  With a sort of instinctive readiness,
she opened the door at the very moment the rifles were ringing in
her ears, and protected by the intervening cabin, she stepped into
the stem of the scow in time to witness the fall of Hurry into the
lake.  Her foot was unconsciously placed on the end of one of the
sheets of the sail, which was fastened aft, and catching up all
the spare rope with the awkwardness, but also with the generous
resolution of a woman, she threw it in the direction of the helpless
Hurry.  The line fell on the head and body of the sinking man and
he not only succeeded in grasping separate parts of it with his
hands, but he actually got a portion of it between his teeth.  Hurry
was an expert swimmer, and tethered as he was he resorted to the
very expedient that philosophy and reflection would have suggested.
He had fallen on his back, and instead of floundering and drowning
himself by desperate efforts to walk on the water, he permitted his
body to sink as low as possible, and was already submerged, with
the exception of his face, when the line reached him.  In this
situation he might possibly have remained until rescued by the
Hurons, using his hands as fishes use their fins, had he received
no other succour, but the movement of the Ark soon tightened the
rope, and of course he was dragged gently ahead holding even pace
with the scow.  The motion aided in keeping his face above the surface
of the water, and it would have been possible for one accustomed
to endurance to have been towed a mile in this singular but simple
manner.

It has been said that the Hurons did not observe the sudden
disappearance of Hurry.  In his present situation he was not only
hid from view by the platform, but, as the Ark drew slowly ahead,
impelled by a sail that was now filled, he received the same friendly
service from the piles.  The Hurons, indeed, were too intent on
endeavoring to slay their Delaware foe, by sending a bullet through
some one of the loops or crevices of the cabin, to bethink them
at all of one whom they fancied so thoroughly tied.  Their great
concern was the manner in which the Ark rubbed past the piles,
although its motion was lessened at least one half by the friction,
and they passed into the northern end of the castle in order to
catch opportunities of firing through the loops of that part of
the building.  Chingachgook was similarly occupied, and remained
as ignorant as his enemies of the situation of Hurry.  As the Ark
grated along the rifles sent their little clouds of smoke from
one cover to the other, but the eyes and movements of the opposing
parties were too quick to permit any injury to be done.  At length
one side had the mortification and the other the pleasure of seeing
the scow swing clear of the piles altogether, when it immediately
moved away, with a materially accelerated motion, towards the north.

Chingachgook now first learned from Hist the critical condition
of Hurry.  To have exposed either of their persons in the stern of
the scow would have been certain death, but fortunately the sheet
to which the man clung led forward to the foot of the sail.  The
Delaware found means to unloosen it from the cleet aft, and Hist,
who was already forward for that purpose, immediately began to pull
upon the line.  At this moment Hurry was towing fifty or sixty feet
astern, with nothing but his face above water.  As he was dragged
out clear of the castle and the piles he was first perceived by the
Hurons, who raised a hideous yell and commenced a fire on, what may
very well be termed the floating mass.  It was at the same instant
that Hist began to pull upon the line forward - a circumstance that
probably saved Hurry's life, aided by his own self-possession and
border readiness.  The first bullet struck the water directly on the
spot where the broad chest of the young giant was visible through
the pure element, and might have pierced his heart had the angle
at which it was fired been less acute.  Instead of penetrating the
lake, however, it glanced from its smooth surface, rose, and buried
itself in the logs of the cabin near the spot at which Chingachgook
had shown himself the minute before, while clearing the line from
the cleet.  A second.  and a third, and a fourth bullet followed,
all meeting with the same resistance of the water, though Hurry
sensibly felt the violence of the blows they struck upon the lake
so immediately above, and so near his breast.  Discovering their
mistake, the Hurons now changed their plan, and aimed at the
uncovered face; but by this time Hist was pulling on the line, the
target advanced and the deadly missiles still fell upon the water.
In another moment the body was dragged past the end of the scow
and became concealed.  As for the Delaware and Hist, they worked
perfectly covered by the cabin, and in less time than it requires
to tell it, they had hauled the huge frame of Harry to the place
they occupied.  Chingachgook stood in readiness with his keen
knife, and bending over the side of the scow he soon severed the
bark that bound the limbs of the borderer.  To raise him high enough
to reach the edge of the boat and to aid him in entering were less
easy, as Hurry's arms were still nearly useless, but both were
done in time, when the liberated man staggered forward and fell
exhausted and helpless into the bottom of the scow.  Here we shall
leave him to recover his strength and the due circulation of his
blood, while we proceed with the narrative of events that crowd
upon us too fast to admit of any postponement.  The moment the
Hurons lost sight of the body of Hurry they gave a common yell of
disappointment, and three of the most active of their number ran
to the trap and entered the canoe.  It required some little delay,
however, to embark with their weapons, to find the paddles and,
if we may use a phrase so purely technical, "to get out of dock."
By this time Hurry was in the scow, and the Delaware had his rifles
again in readiness.  As the Ark necessarily sailed before the wind,
it had got by this time quite two hundred yards from the castle,
and was sliding away each instant, farther and farther, though with
a motion so easy as scarcely to stir the water.  The canoe of the
girls was quite a quarter of a mile distant from the Ark, obviously
keeping aloof, in ignorance of what had occurred, and in apprehension
of the consequences of venturing too near.  They had taken the
direction of the eastern shore, endeavoring at the same time to get
to windward of the Ark, and in a manner between the two parties,
as if distrusting which was to be considered a friend, and which
an enemy.  The girls, from long habit, used the paddles with great
dexterity, and Judith, in particular, had often sportively gained
races, in trials of speed with the youths that occasionally visited
the lake.

When the three Hurons emerged from behind the palisades, and found
themselves on the open lake, and under the necessity of advancing
unprotected on the Ark, if they persevered in the original design,
their ardor sensibly cooled.  In a bark canoe they were totally
without cover, and Indian discretion was entirely opposed to such
a sacrifice of life as would most probably follow any attempt to
assault an enemy entrenched as effectually as the Delaware.  Instead
of following the Ark, therefore, these three warriors inclined
towards the eastern shore, keeping at a safe distance from the
rifles of Chingachgook.  But this manoeuvre rendered the position
of the girls exceedingly critical.  It threatened to place them if
not between two fires, at least between two dangers, or what they
conceived to be dangers, and instead of permitting the Hurons to
enclose her, in what she fancied a sort of net, Judith immediately
commenced her retreat in a southern direction, at no very great
distance from the shore.  She did not dare to land; if such an
expedient were to be resorted to at all, she could only venture on
it in the last extremity.  At first the Indians paid little or no
attention to the other canoe, for, fully apprised of its contents,
they deemed its capture of compar