, if they're actyve and successful, they may possibly get
on the end of the Iroquois trail some two or three days a'ter the
inimy has got off of it?"

Like his betrothed, the young chief arose, that his answer might
be given with due distinctness and dignity.  Hist had spoken with
her hands crossed upon her bosom, as if to suppress the emotions
within, but the warrior stretched an arm before him with a calm
energy that aided in giving emphasis to his expressions.  "Wampum
should be sent for wampum," he said; "a message must be answered
by a message.  Hear what the Great Serpent of the Delawares has to
say to the pretended wolves from the great lakes, that are howling
through our woods.  They are no wolves; they are dogs that have come
to get their tails and ears cropped by the hands of the Delawares.
They are good at stealing young women; bad at keeping them.
Chingachgook takes his own where he finds it; he asks leave of no
cur from the Canadas.  If he has a tender feeling in his heart, it
is no business of the Hurons.  He tells it to her who most likes
to know it; he will not bellow it in the forest, for the ears of
those that only understand yells of terror.  What passes in his
lodge is not for the chiefs of his own people to know; still less
for Mingo rogues -"

"Call 'em vagabonds, Sarpent -" interrupted Deerslayer, unable to
restrain his delight - "yes, just call 'em up-and-down vagabonds,
which is a word easily intarpreted, and the most hateful of all to
their ears, it's so true.  Never fear me; I'll give em your message,
syllable for syllable, sneer for sneer, idee for idee, scorn for
scorn, and they desarve no better at your hands -only call 'em
vagabonds, once or twice, and that will set the sap mounting in
'em, from their lowest roots to the uppermost branches!"

"Still less for Mingo vagabonds," resumed Chingachgook, quite
willingly complying with his friend's request.  "Tell the Huron dogs
to howl louder, if they wish a Delaware to find them in the woods,
where they burrow like foxes, instead of hunting like warriors.
When they had a Delaware maiden in their camp, there was a reason
for hunting them up; now they will be forgotten unless they make a
noise.  Chingachgook don't like the trouble of going to his villages
for more warriors; he can strike their run-a-way trail; unless they
hide it under ground, he will follow it to Canada alone.  He will
keep Wah-ta-Wah with him to cook his game; they two will be Delawares
enough to scare all the Hurons back to their own country ."

"That's a grand despatch, as the officers call them things!"
cried Deerslayer; "'twill set all the Huron blood in motion; most
particularily that part where he tells 'em Hist, too, will keep on
their heels 'til they're fairly driven out of the country.  Ahs!
me; big words ain't always big deeds, notwithstanding!  The Lord
send that we be able to be only one half as good as we promise to
be!  And now, Judith, it's your turn to speak, for them miscreants
will expect an answer from each person, poor Hetty, perhaps,
excepted."

"And why not Hetty, Deerslayer?  She often speaks to the purpose;
the Indians may respect her words, for they feel for people in her
condition."

"That is true, Judith, and quick-thoughted in you.  The red-skins
do respect misfortunes of all kinds, and Hetty's in particular.  So,
Hetty, if you have any thing to say, I'll carry it to the Hurons
as faithfully as if it was spoken by a schoolmaster, or a missionary."

The girl hesitated a moment, and then she answered in her own
gentle, soft tones, as earnestly as any who had preceded her.

"The Hurons can't understand the difference between white people
and themselves," she said, "or they wouldn't ask Judith and me to
go and live in their villages.  God has given one country to the
red men and another to us.  He meant us to live apart.  Then mother
always said that we should never dwell with any but Christians,
if possible, and that is a reason why we can't go.  This lake is
ours, and we won't leave it.  Father and mother's graves are in it,
and even the worst Indians love to stay near the graves of their
fathers.  I will come and see them again, if they wish me to, and
read more out of the Bible to them, but I can't quit father's and
mother's graves."

"That will do - that will do, Hetty, just as well as if you sent
them a message twice as long," interrupted the hunter.  "I'll tell
'em all you've said, and all you mean, and I'll answer for it that
they'll be easily satisfied.  Now, Judith, your turn comes next,
and then this part of my ar'n'd will be tarminated for the night."

Judith manifested a reluctance to give her reply, that had awakened
a little curiosity in the messenger.  Judging from her known spirit,
he had never supposed the girl would be less true her feelings
and principles than Hist, or Hetty, and yet there was a visible
wavering of purpose that rendered him slightly uneasy.  Even now
when directly required to speak, she seemed to hesitate, nor did
she open her lips until the profound silence told her how anxiously
her words were expected.  Then, indeed, she spoke, but it was
doubtingly and with reluctance.

"Tell me, first - tell us, first, Deerslayer," she commenced,
repeating the words merely to change the emphasis - "what effect
will our answers have on your fate?  If you are to be the sacrifice
of our spirit, it would have been better had we all been more
wary as to the language we use.  What, then, are likely to be the
consequences to yourself?"

"Lord, Judith, you might as well ask me which way the wind will
blow next week, or what will be the age of the next deer that will
be shot!  I can only say that their faces look a little dark upon
me, but it doesn't thunder every time a black cloud rises, nor does
every puff of wind blow up rain.  That's a question, therefore,
much more easily put than answered."

"So is this message of the Iroquois to me," answered Judith rising,
as if she had determined on her own course for the present.  "My
answer shall be given, Deerslayer, after you and I have talked
together alone, when the others have laid themselves down for the
night."

There was a decision in the manner of the girl that disposed
Deerslayer to comply, and this he did the more readily as the delay
could produce no material consequences one way or the other.  The
meeting now broke up, Hurry announcing his resolution to leave
them speedily.  During the hour that was suffered to intervene, in
order that the darkness might deepen before the frontierman took
his departure, the different individuals occupied themselves in
their customary modes, the hunter, in particular, passing most of
the time in making further enquiries into the perfection of the
rifle already mentioned.

The hour of nine soon arrived, however, and then it had been
determined that Hurry should commence his journey.  Instead of
making his adieus frankly, and in a generous spirit, the little he
thought it necessary to say was uttered sullenly and in coldness.
Resentment at what he considered Judith's obstinacy was blended
with mortification at the career he had since reaching the lake,
and, as is usual with the vulgar and narrow-minded, he was more
disposed to reproach others with his failures than to censure himself.
Judith gave him her hand, but it was quite as much in gladness as
with regret, while the two Delawares were not sorry to find he was
leaving them.  Of the whole party, Hetty alone betrayed any real
feeling.  Bashfulness, and the timidity of her sex and character,
kept even her aloof, so that Hurry entered the canoe, where Deerslayer
was already waiting for him, before she ventured near enough to be
observed.  Then, indeed, the girl came into the Ark and approached
its end, just as the little bark was turning from it, with a movement
so light and steady as to be almost imperceptible.  An impulse of
feeling now overcame her timidity, and Hetty spoke.

"Goodbye Hurry -" she called out, in her sweet voice - "goodbye,
dear Hurry.  Take care of yourself in the woods, and don't stop
once, 'til you reach the garrison.  The leaves on the trees are
scarcely plentier than the Hurons round the lake, and they'll not
treat a strong man like you as kindly as they treat me."

The ascendency which March had obtained over this feebleminded,
but right-thinking, and right-feeling girl, arose from a law of
nature.  Her senses had been captivated by his personal advantages,
and her moral communications with him had never been sufficiently
intimate to counteract an effect that must have been otherwise
lessened, even with one whose mind was as obtuse as her own.  Hetty's
instinct of right, if such a term can be applied to one who seemed
taught by some kind spirit how to steer her course with unerring
accuracy, between good and evil, would have revolted at Hurry's
character on a thousand points, had there been opportunities to
enlighten her, but while he conversed and trifled with her sister,
at a distance from herself, his perfection of form and feature had
been left to produce their influence on her simple imagination and
naturally tender feelings, without suffering by the alloy of his
opinions and coarseness.  It is true she found him rough and rude;
but her father was that, and most of the other men she had seen,
and that which she believed to belong to all of the sex struck
her less unfavorably in Hurry's character than it might otherwise
have done.  Still, it was not absolutely love that Hetty felt for
Hurry, nor do we wish so to portray it, but merely that awakening
sensibility and admiration, which, under more propitious circumstances,
and always supposing no untoward revelations of character on the
part of the young man had supervened to prevent it, might soon
have ripened into that engrossing feeling.  She felt for him an
incipient tenderness, but scarcely any passion.  Perhaps the nearest
approach to the latter that Hetty had manifested was to be seen in
the sensitiveness which had caused her to detect March's predilection
for her sister, for, among Judith's many admirers, this was the
only instance in which the dull mind of the girl had been quickened
into an observation of the circumstances.

Hurry received so little sympathy at his departure that the gentle
tones of Hetty, as she thus called after him, sounded soothingly.
He checked the canoe, and with one sweep of his powerful arm brought
it back to the side of the Ark.  This was more than Hetty, whose
courage had risen with the departure of her hero, expected, and
she now shrunk timidly back at this unexpected return.

"You're a good gal, Hetty, and I can't quit you without shaking
hands,"  said March kindly.  "Judith, a'ter all, isn't worth as much
as you, though she may be a trifle better looking.  As to wits, if
honesty and fair dealing with a young man is a sign of sense in a
young woman, you're worth a dozen Judiths; ay, and for that matter,
most young women of my acquaintance."

"Don't say any thing against Judith, Harry," returned Hetty
imploringly.  "Father's gone, and mother's gone, and nobody's left
but Judith and me, and it isn't right for sisters to speak evil,
or to hear evil of each other.  Father's in the lake, and so is
mother, and we should all fear God, for we don't know when we may
be in the lake, too."

"That sounds reasonable, child, as does most you say.  Well, if we
ever meet ag'in, Hetty, you'll find a fri'nd in me, let your sister
do what she may.  I was no great fri'nd of your mother I'll allow,
for we didn't think alike on most p'ints, but then your father, Old
Tom, and I, fitted each other as remarkably as a buckskin garment
will fit any reasonable-built man.  I've always been unanimous of
opinion that Old Floating Tom Hutter, at the bottom, was a good
fellow, and will maintain that ag'in all inimies for his sake, as
well as for your'n."

"Goodbye, Hurry," said Hetty, who now wanted to hasten the young
man off, as ardently as she had wished to keep him only the moment
before, though she could give no clearer account of the latter than
of the former feeling; "goodbye, Hurry; take care of yourself in
the woods; don't halt 'til you reach the garrison.  I'll read a
chapter in the Bible for you before I go to bed, and think of you
in my prayers."

This was touching a point on which March had no sympathies, and
without more words, he shook the girl cordially by the hand and
re-entered the canoe.  In another minute the two adventurers were a
hundred feet from the Ark, and half a dozen had not elapsed before
they were completely lost to view.  Hetty sighed deeply, and rejoined
her sister and Hist.

For some time Deerslayer and his companion paddled ahead in silence.
It had been determined to land Hurry at the precise point where he
is represented, in the commencement of our tale, as having embarked,
not only as a place little likely to be watched by the Hurons, but
because he was sufficiently familiar with the signs of the woods,
at that spot, to thread his way through them in the dark.  Thither,
then, the light craft proceeded, being urged as diligently and
as swiftly as two vigorous and skilful canoemen could force their
little vessel through, or rather over, the water.  Less than a quarter
of an hour sufficed for the object, and, at the end of that time,
being within the shadows of the shore, and quite near the point
they sought, each ceased his efforts in order to make their parting
communications out of earshot of any straggler who might happen to
be in the neighborhood.

"You will do well to persuade the officers at the garrison to lead
out a party ag'in these vagabonds as soon as you git in, Hurry,"
Deerslayer commenced; "and you'll do better if you volunteer to guide
it up yourself.  You know the paths, and the shape of the lake,
and the natur' of the land, and can do it better than a common,
gin'ralizing scout.  Strike at the Huron camp first, and follow
the signs that will then show themselves.  A few looks at the hut
and the Ark will satisfy you as to the state of the Delaware and
the women, and, at any rate, there'll be a fine opportunity to
fall on the Mingo trail, and to make a mark on the memories of the
blackguards that they'll be apt to carry with 'em a long time.  It
won't be likely to make much difference with me, since that matter
will be detarmined afore tomorrow's sun has set, but it may make
a great change in Judith and Hetty's hopes and prospects!"

"And as for yourself, Nathaniel," Hurry enquired with more interest
than he was accustomed to betray in the welfare of others - "And,
as for yourself, what do you think is likely to turn up?"

"The Lord, in his wisdom, only can tell, Henry March!  The clouds
look black and threatening, and I keep my mind in a state to meet
the worst.  Vengeful feelin's are uppermost in the hearts of the
Mingos, and any little disapp'intment about the plunder, or the
prisoners, or Hist, may make the torments sartain.  The Lord, in
his wisdom, can only detarmine my fate, or your'n!"

"This is a black business, and ought to be put a stop to in some way
or other -" answered Hurry, confounding the distinctions between
right and wrong, as is usual with selfish and vulgar men.  "I
heartily wish old Hutter and I had scalped every creatur' in their
camp, the night we first landed with that capital object!  Had you
not held back, Deerslayer, it might have been done, and then you
wouldn't have found yourself, at the last moment, in the desperate
condition you mention."

"'Twould have been better had you said you wished you had never
attempted to do what it little becomes any white man's gifts to
undertake; in which case, not only might we have kept from coming
to blows, but Thomas Hutter would now have been living, and the
hearts of the savages would be less given to vengeance.  The death
of that young woman, too, was on-called for, Henry March, and leaves
a heavy load on our names if not on our consciences!"

This was so apparent, and it seemed so obvious to Hurry himself,
at the moment, that he dashed his paddle into the water, and began
to urge the canoe towards the shore, as if bent only on running away
from his own lively remorse.  His companion humoured this feverish
desire for change, and, in a minute or two, the bows of the boat
grated lightly on the shingle of the beach.  To land, shoulder his
pack and rifle, and to get ready for his march occupied Hurry but
an instant, and with a growling adieu, he had already commenced
his march,	when a sudden twinge of feeling brought him to a dead
stop, and immediately after to the other's side.

"You cannot mean to give yourself up ag'in to them murdering savages,
Deerslayer!" he said, quite as much in angry remonstrance, as with
generous feeling.  "Twould be the act of a madman or a fool!"

"There's them that thinks it madness to keep their words, and
there's them that don't, Hurry Harry.  You may be one of the first,
but I'm one of the last.  No red-skin breathing shall have it in
his power to say that a Mingo minds his word more than a man of
white blood and white gifts, in any thing that consarns me.  I'm
out on a furlough, and if I've strength and reason, I'll go in on
a furlough afore noon to-morrow!"

"What's an Injin, or a word passed, or a furlough taken from
creatur's like them, that have neither souls, nor reason!"

"If they've got neither souls nor reason, you and I have both,
Henry March, and one is accountable for the other.  This furlough
is not, as you seem to think, a matter altogether atween me and
the Mingos, seeing it is a solemn bargain made atween me and God.
He who thinks that he can say what he pleases, in his distress,
and that twill all pass for nothing, because 'tis uttered in the
forest, and into red men's ears, knows little of his situation,
and hopes, and wants.  The woods are but the ears of the Almighty,
the air is his breath, and the light of the sun is little more than
a glance of his eye.  Farewell, Harry; we may not meet ag'in, but
I would wish you never to treat a furlough, or any other solemn
thing that your Christian God has been called on to witness, as a
duty so light that it may be forgotten according to the wants of
the body, or even accordin' to the cravings of the spirit."

March was now glad again to escape.  It was quite impossible that
he could enter into the sentiments that ennobled his companion, and
he broke away from both with an impatience that caused him secretly
to curse the folly that could induce a man to rush, as it were,
on his own destruction.  Deerslayer, on the contrary, manifested
no such excitement.  Sustained by his principles, inflexible
in the purpose of acting up to them, and superior to any unmanly
apprehension, he regarded all before him as a matter of course, and
no more thought of making any unworthy attempt to avoid it, than
a Mussulman thinks of counteracting the decrees of Providence.  He
stood calmly on the shore, listening to the reckless tread with
which Hurry betrayed his progress through the bushes, shook his
head in dissatisfaction at the want of caution, and then stepped
quietly into his canoe.  Before he dropped the paddle again into
the water, the young man gazed about him at the scene presented
by the star-lit night.  This was the spot where he had first laid
his eyes on the beautiful sheet of water on which he floated.  If
it was then glorious in the bright light of a summer's noon-tide,
it was now sad and melancholy under the shadows of night.  The
mountains rose around it like black barriers to exclude the outer
world, and the gleams of pale light that rested on the broader
parts of the basin were no bad symbols of the faintness of the hopes
that were so dimly visible in his own future.  Sighing heavily, he
pushed the canoe from the land, and took his way back with steady
diligence towards the Ark and the castle.



Chapter XXIV


"Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame; Thy private feasting to
a public fast; Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name; Thy sugar'd
tongue to bitter worm wood taste: Thy violent vanities can never
last."

Shakespeare, Rape of Lucrece, 11.  890-94.

Judith was waiting the return of Deerslayer on the platform, with
stifled impatience, when the latter reached the hut.  Hist and Hetty
were both in a deep sleep, on the bed usually occupied by the two
daughters of the house, and the Delaware was stretched on the floor
of the adjoining room, his rifle at his side, and a blanket over
him, already dreaming of the events of the last few days.  There
was a lamp burning in the Ark, for the family was accustomed to
indulge in this luxury on extraordinary occasions, and possessed
the means, the vessel being of a form and material to render it
probable it had once been an occupant of the chest.

As soon as the girl got a glimpse of the canoe, she ceased her
hurried walk up and down the platform and stood ready to receive
the young man, whose return she had now been anxiously expecting
for some time.  She helped him to fasten the canoe, and by aiding
in the other little similar employments, manifested her desire to
reach a moment of liberty as soon as possible.  When this was done,
in answer to an inquiry of his, she informed him of the manner in
which their companions had disposed of themselves.  He listened
attentively, for the manner of the girl was so earnest and impressive
as to apprise him that she had something on her mind of more than
common concern.

"And now, Deerslayer," Judith continued, "you see I have lighted
the lamp, and put it in the cabin of the Ark.  That is never done
with us, unless on great occasions, and I consider this night as
the most important of my life.  Will you follow me and see what I
have to show you - hear what I have to say."

The hunter was a little surprised, but, making no objections, both
were soon in the scow, and in the room that contained the light.
Here two stools were placed at the side of the chest, with the lamp
on another, and a table near by to receive the different articles
as they might be brought to view.  This arrangement had its rise
in the feverish impatience of the girl, which could brook no delay
that it was in her power to obviate.  Even all the padlocks were
removed, and it only remained to raise the heavy lid, again, to
expose all the treasures of this long secreted hoard.

"I see, in part, what all this means," observed Deerslayer - "yes,
I see through it, in part.  But why is not Hetty present?  Now Thomas
Hutter is gone, she is one of the owners of these cur'osities, and
ought to see them opened and handled."

"Hetty sleeps -" answered Judith, huskily.  "Happily for her, fine
clothes and riches have no charms.  Besides she has this night
given her share of all that the chest may hold to me, that I may
do with it as I please."

"Is poor Hetty compass enough for that, Judith?" demanded the
just-minded young man.  "It's a good rule and a righteous one, never
to take when them that give don't know the valie of their gifts;
and such as God has visited heavily in their wits ought to be
dealt with as carefully as children that haven't yet come to their
understandings."

Judith was hurt at this rebuke, coming from the person it did,
but she would have felt it far more keenly had not her conscience
fully acquitted her of any unjust intentions towards her feeble-minded
but confiding sister.  It was not a moment, however, to betray any
of her usual mountings of the spirit, and she smothered the passing
sensation in the desire to come to the great object she had in
view.

"Hetty will not be wronged," she mildly answered; "she even knows
not only what I am about to do, Deerslayer, but why I do it.  So
take your seat, raise the lid of the chest, and this time we will
go to the bottom.  I shall be disappointed if something is not
found to tell us more of the history of Thomas Hutter and my mother."

"Why Thomas Hutter, Judith, and not your father?  The dead ought
to meet with as much reverence as the living!"

"I have long suspected that Thomas Hutter was not my father, though
I did think he might have been Hetty's, but now we know he was the
father of neither.  He acknowledged that much in his dying moments.
I am old enough to remember better things than we have seen on
this lake, though they are so faintly impressed on my memory that
the earlier part of my life seems like a dream."

"Dreams are but miserable guides when one has to detarmine about
realities, Judith," returned the other admonishingly.  "Fancy nothing
and hope nothing on their account, though I've known chiefs that
thought 'em useful."

"I expect nothing for the future from them, my good friend, but
cannot help remembering what has been.  This is idle, however, when
half an hour of examination may tell us all, or even more than I
want to know."

Deerslayer, who comprehended the girl's impatience, now took his
seat and proceeded once more to bring to light the different articles
that the chest contained.  As a matter of course, all that had been
previously examined were found where they had been last deposited,
and they excited much less interest or comment than when formerly
exposed to view.  Even Judith laid aside the rich brocade with an
air of indifference, for she had a far higher aim before her than
the indulgence of vanity, and was impatient to come at the still
hidden, or rather unknown, treasures.

"All these we have seen before," she said, "and will not stop to
open.  The bundle under your hand, Deerslayer, is a fresh one; that
we will look into.  God send it may contain something to tell poor
Hetty and myself who we really are!"

"Ay, if some bundles could speak, they might tell wonderful secrets,"
returned the young man deliberately undoing the folds of another
piece of course canvass, in order to come at the contents of the
roll that lay on his knees: "though this doesn't seem to be one
of that family, seeing 'tis neither more nor less than a sort of
flag, though of what nation, it passes my l'arnin' to say."

"That flag must have some meaning to it -" Judith hurriedly interposed.
"Open it wider, Deerslayer, that we may see the colours."

"Well, I pity the ensign that has to shoulder this cloth, and to
parade it about on the field.  Why 'tis large enough, Judith,to
make a dozen of them colours the King's officers set so much store
by.  These can be no ensign's colours, but a gin'ral's!"

"A ship might carry it, Deerslayer, and ships I know do use such
things.  Have you never heard any fearful stories about Thomas Hurter's
having once been concerned with the people they call buccaneers?"

"Buck-ah-near!  Not I - not I - I never heard him mentioned as good
at a buck far off, or near by.  Hurry Harry did till me something
about its being supposed that he had formerly, in some way or
other, dealings with sartain sea robbers, but, Lord, Judith, it
can't surely give you any satisfaction to make out that ag'in your
mother's own husband, though he isn't your father."

"Anything will give me satisfaction that tells me who I am, and
helps to explain the dreams of childhood.  My mother's husband!
Yes, he must have been that, though why a woman like her, should
have chosen a man like him, is more than mortal reason can explain.
You never saw mother, Deerslayer, and can't feel the vast, vast
difference there was between them!"

"Such things do happen, howsever; - yes, they do happen; though
why providence lets them come to pass is more than I understand.
I've knew the f'ercest warriors with the gentlest wives of any in
the tribe, and awful scolds fall to the lot of Injins fit to be
missionaries."

"That was not it, Deerslayer; that was not it.  Oh!  if it should
prove that -no; I cannot wish she should not have been his wife at
all.  That no daughter can wish for her own mother!  Go on, now,
and let us see what the square looking bundle holds."

Deerslayer complied, and he found that it contained a small trunk
of pretty workmanship, but fastened.  The next point was to find
a key; but, search proving ineffectual, it was determined to force
the lock.  This Deerslayer soon effected by the aid of an iron
instrument, and it was found that the interior was nearly filled
with papers.  Many were letters; some fragments of manuscripts,
memorandums, accounts, and other similar documents.  The hawk does
not pounce upon the chicken with a more sudden swoop than Judith
sprang forward to seize this mine of hitherto concealed knowledge.
Her education, as the reader will have perceived, was far superior
to her situation in life, and her eye glanced over page after page
of the letters with a readiness that her schooling supplied, and
with an avidity that found its origin in her feelings.  At first it
was evident that the girl was gratified; and we may add with reason,
for the letters written by females, in innocence and affection,
were of a character to cause her to feel proud of those with whom
she had every reason to think she was closely connected by the ties
of blood.  It does not come within the scope of our plan to give
more of these epistles, however, than a general idea of their
contents, and this will best be done by describing the effect they
produced on the manner, appearance, and feeling of her who was so
eagerly perusing them.

It has been said, already, that Judith was much gratified with the
letters that first met her eye.  They contained the correspondence
of an affectionate and inteffigent mother to an absent daughter,
with such allusions to the answers as served in a great measure
to fill up the vacuum left by the replies.  They were not without
admonitions and warnings, however, and Judith felt the blood mounting
to her temples, and a cold shudder succeeding, as she read one in
which the propriety of the daughter's indulging in as much intimacy
as had evidently been described in one of the daughter's own letters,
with an officer "who came from Europe, and who could hardly be
supposed to wish to form an honorable connection in America," was
rather coldly commented on by the mother.  What rendered it singular
was the fact that the signatures had been carefully cut from every
one of these letters, and wherever a name occurred in the body of
the epistles it had been erased with so much diligence as to render
it impossible to read it.  They had all been enclosed in envelopes,
according to the fashion of the age, and not an address either was
to be found.  Still the letters themselves had been religiously
pre served, and Judith thought she could discover traces of tears
remaining on several.  She now remembered to have seen the little
trunk in her mother's keeping, previously to her death, and she
supposed it had first been deposited in the chest, along with the
other forgotten or concealed objects, when the letters could no
longer contribute to that parent's grief or happiness.

Next came another bundle, and these were filled with the protestations
of love, written with passion certainly, but also with that deceit
which men so often think it justifiable to use to the other sex.
Judith had shed tears abundantly over the first packet, but now she
felt a sentiment of indignation and pride better sustaining her.
Her hand shook, however, and cold shivers again passed through her
frame, as she discovered a few points of strong resemblance between
these letters and some it had been her own fate to receive.  Once,
indeed, she laid the packet down, bowed her head to her knees, and
seemed nearly convulsed.  All this time Deerslayer sat a silent
but attentive observer of every thing that passed.  As Judith read
a letter she put it into his hands to hold until she could peruse
the next; but this served in no degree to enlighten her companion,
as he was totally unable to read.  Nevertheless he was not entirely
at fault in discovering the passions that were contending in the
bosom of the fair creature by his side, and, as occasional sentences
escaped her in murmurs, he was nearer the truth, in his divinations,
or conjectures, than the girl would have been pleased at discovering.

Judith had commenced with the earliest letters, luckily for a
ready comprehension of the tale they told, for they were carefully
arranged in chronological order, and to any one who would take the
trouble to peruse them, would have revealed a sad history of gratified
passion, coldness, and finally of aversion.  As she obtained the
clue to their import, her impatience would not admit of delay,
and she soon got to glancing her eyes over a page by way of coming
at the truth in the briefest manner possible.  By adopting this
expedient, one to which all who are eager to arrive at results
without encumbering themselves with details are so apt to resort,
Judith made a rapid progress in these melancholy revelations of
her mother's failing and punishment.  She saw that the period of
her own birth was distinctly referred to, and even learned that the
homely name she bore was given her by the father, of whose person
she retained so faint an impression as to resemble a dream.  This
name was not obliterated from the text of the letters, but stood
as if nothing was to be gained by erasing it.  Hetty's birth was
mentioned once, and in that instance the name was the mother's, but
ere this period was reached came the signs of coldness, shadowing
forth the desertion that was so soon to follow.  It was in this stage
of the correspondence that her mother had recourse to the plan of
copying her own epistles.  They were but few, but were eloquent
with the feelings of blighted affection, and contrition.  Judith
sobbed over them, until again and again she felt compelled to lay
them aside from sheer physical inability to see; her eyes being
literally obscured with tears.  Still she returned to the task, with
increasing interest, and finally succeeded in reaching the end of
the latest communication that had probably ever passed between her
parents.

All this occupied fully an hour, for near a hundred letters were
glanced at, and some twenty had been closely read.  The truth now
shone clear upon the acute mind of Judith, so far as her own birth
and that of Hetty were concerned.  She sickened at the conviction,
and for the moment the rest of the world seemed to be cut off from
her, and she had now additional reasons for wishing to pass the
remainder of her life on the lake, where she had already seen so
many bright and so many sorrowing days.

There yet remained more letters to examine.  Judith found these
were a correspondence between her mother and Thomas Hovey.  The
originals of both parties were carefully arranged, letter and answer,
side by side; and they told the early history of the connection
between the ill-assorted pair far more plainly than Judith wished
to learn it.  Her mother made the advances towards a marriage, to
the surprise, not to say horror of her daughter, and she actually
found a relief when she discovered traces of what struck her as
insanity - or a morbid desperation, bordering on that dire calamity
- in the earlier letters of that ill-fated woman.  The answers of
Hovey were coarse and illiterate, though they manifested a sufficient
desire to obtain the hand of a woman of singular personal attractions,
and whose great error he was willing to overlook for the advantage
of possessing one every way so much his superior, and who it also
appeared was not altogether destitute of money.  The remainder of
this part of the correspondence was brief, and it was soon confined
to a few communications on business, in which the miserable wife
hastened the absent husband in his preparations to abandon a world
which there was a sufficient reason to think was as dangerous
to one of the parties as it was disagreeable to the other.  But a
sincere expression had escaped her mother, by which Judith could
get a clue to the motives that had induced her to marry Hovey, or
Hutter, and this she found was that feeling of resentment which so
often tempts the injured to inflict wrongs on themselves by way of
heaping coals on the heads of those through whom they have suffered.
Judith had enough of the spirit of that mother to comprehend this
sentiment, and for a moment did she see the exceeding folly which
permitted such revengeful feelings to get the ascendancy.

There what may be called the historical part of the papers ceased.
Among the loose fragments, however, was an old newspaper that
contained a proclamation offering a reward for the apprehension of
certain free-booters by name, among which was that of Thomas Hovey.
The attention of the girl was drawn to the proclamation and to
this particular name by the circumstance that black lines had been
drawn under both, in ink.  Nothing else was found among the papers
that could lead to a discovery of either the name or the place of
residence of the wife of Hutter.  All the dates, signatures, and
addresses had been cut from the letters, and wherever a word occurred
in the body of the communications that might furnish a clue, it was
scrupulously erased.  Thus Judith found all her hopes of ascertaining
who her parents were defeated, and she was obliged to fall back
on her own resources and habits for everything connected with the
future.  Her recollection of her mother's manners, conversation,
and sufferings filled up many a gap in the historical facts she had
now discovered, and the truth, in its outlines, stood sufficiently
distinct before her to take away all desire, indeed, to possess
any more details.  Throwing herself back in her seat, she simply
desired her companion to finish the examination of the other articles
in the chest, as it might yet contain something of importance.

"I'll do it, Judith; I'll do it," returned the patient Deerslayer,
"but if there's many more letters to read, we shall see the sun
ag'in afore you've got through with the reading of them!  Two good
hours have you been looking at them bits of papers!"

"They tell me of my parents, Deerslayer, and have settled my plans
for life.  A girl may be excused, who reads about her own father
and mother, and that too for the first time in her life!  I am
sorry to have kept you waiting."

"Never mind me, gal; never mind me.  It matters little whether I
sleep or watch; but though you be pleasant to look at, and are so
handsome, Judith, it is not altogether agreeable to sit so long to
behold you shedding tears.  I know that tears don't kill, and that
some people are better for shedding a few now and then, especially
young women; but I'd rather see you smile any time, Judith, than
see you weep."

This gallant speech was rewarded with a sweet, though a melancholy
smile; and then the girl again desired her companion to finish the
examination of the chest.  The search necessarily continued some
time, during which Judith collected her thoughts and regained her
composure.  She took no part in the search, leaving everything to
the young man, looking listlessly herself at the different articles
that came uppermost.  Nothing further of much interest or value,
however, was found.  A sword or two, such as were then worn by
gentlemen, some buckles of silver, or so richly plated as to appear
silver, and a few handsome articles of female dress, composed the
principal discoveries.  It struck both Judith and the Deerslayer,
notwithstanding, that some of these things might be made useful in
effecting a negotiation with the Iroquois, though the latter saw a
difficulty in the way that was not so apparent to the former.  The
conversation was first renewed in connection with this point.

"And now, Deerslayer," said Judith, "we may talk of yourself, and
of the means of getting you out of the hands of the Hurons.  Any
part, or all of what you have seen in the chest, will be cheerfully
given by me and Hetty to set you at liberty."

"Well, that's gin'rous, - yes, 'tis downright free-hearted, and
free-handed, and gin'rous.  This is the way with women; when they
take up a fri'ndship, they do nothing by halves, but are as willing
to part with their property as if it had no value in their eyes.
However, while I thank you both, just as much as if the bargain
was made, and Rivenoak, or any of the other vagabonds, was here to
accept and close the treaty, there's two principal reasons why it
can never come to pass, which may be as well told at once, in order
no onlikely expectations may be raised in you, or any onjustifiable
hopes in me."

"What reason can there be, if Hetty and I are willing to part with
the trifles for your sake, and the savages are willing to receive
them?"

"That's it, Judith; you've got the idees, but they're a little out
of their places, as if a hound should take the back'ard instead
of the leading scent.  That the Mingos will be willing to receive
them things, or any more like 'em you may have to offer is probable
enough, but whether they'll pay valie for 'em is quite another
matter.  Ask yourself, Judith, if any one should send you a message
to say that, for such or such a price, you and Hetty might have that
chist and all it holds, whether you'd think it worth your while to
waste many words on the bargain?"

"But this chest and all it holds, are already ours; there is no
reason why we should purchase what is already our own."

"Just so the Mingos caculate!  They say the chist is theirn, already;
or, as good as theirn, and they'll not thank anybody for the key."

"I understand you, Deerslayer; surely we are yet in possession
of the lake, and we can keep possession of it until Hurry sends
troops to drive off the enemy.  This we may certainly do provided
you will stay with us, instead of going back and giving yourself
up a prisoner, again, as you now seem determined on."

"That Hurry Harry should talk in thisaway, is nat'ral, and according
to the gifts of the man.  He knows no better, and, therefore, he
is little likely to feel or to act any better; but, Judith, I put
it to your heart and conscience - would you, could you think of me
as favorably, as I hope and believe you now do, was I to forget my
furlough and not go back to the camp?"

"To think more favorably of you than I now do, Deerslayer, would
not be easy; but I might continue to think as favorably - at least
it seems so - I hope I could, for a world wouldn't tempt me to let
you do anything that might change my real opinion of you."

"Then don't try to entice me to overlook my furlough, gal!  A
furlough is a sacred thing among warriors and men that carry their
lives in their hands, as we of the forests do, and what a grievous
disapp'intment would it be to old Tamenund, and to Uncas, the
father of the Sarpent, and to my other fri'nds in the tribe, if
I was so to disgrace myself on my very first war-path.  This you
will pairceive, moreover, Judith, is without laying any stress on
nat'ral gifts, and a white man's duties, to say nothing of conscience.
The last is king with me, and I try never to dispute his orders."

"I believe you are right, Deerslayer," returned the girl, after a
little reflection and in a saddened voice: "a man like you ought
not to act as the selfish and dishonest would be apt to act; you
must, indeed, go back.  We will talk no more of this, then.  Should
I persuade you to anything for which you would be sorry hereafter,
my own regret would not be less than yours.  You shall not have it
to say, Judith - I scarce know by what name to call myself, now!"

"And why not?  Why not, gal?  Children take the names of their
parents, nat'rally, and by a sort of gift, like, and why shouldn't
you and Hetty do as others have done afore ye?  Hutter was the
old man's name, and Hutter should be the name of his darters; - at
least until you are given away in lawful and holy wedlock."

"I am Judith, and Judith only," returned the girl positively -"until
the law gives me a right to another name.  Never will I use that
of Thomas Hutter again; nor, with my consent, shall Hetty!  Hutter
was not even his own name, I find, but had he a thousand rights to
it, it would give none to me.  He was not my father, thank heaven;
though I may have no reason to be proud of him that was!"

"This is strange!" said Deerslayer, looking steadily at the excited
girl, anxious to know more, but unwilling to inquire into matters
that did not properly concern him; "yes, this is very strange and
oncommon!  Thomas Hutter wasn't Thomas Hutter, and his darters
weren't his darters!  Who, then, could Thomas Hutter be, and who
are his darters?"

"Did you never hear anything whispered against the former life of
this person, Deerslayer?" demanded Judith "Passing, as I did, for
his child, such reports reached even me."

"I'll not deny it, Judith; no, I'll not deny it.  Sartain things
have been said, as I've told you, but I'm not very credible as to
reports.  Young as I am, I've lived long enough to l'arn there's two
sorts of characters in the world - them that is 'arned by deeds,
and them that is 'arned by tongues, and so I prefar to see and
judge for myself, instead of letting every jaw that chooses to wag
become my judgment.  Hurry Harry spoke pretty plainly of the whole
family, as we journeyed this-a-way, and he did hint something
consarning Thomas Hutter's having been a free-liver on the water,
in his younger days.  By free-liver, I mean that he made free to
live on other men's goods."

"He told you he was a pirate - there is no need of mincing matters
between friends.  Read that, Deerslayer, and you will see that he
told you no more than the truth.  This Thomas Hovey was the Thomas
Hutter you knew, as is seen by these letters."

As Judith spoke, with a flushed cheek and eyes dazzling with
the brilliancy of excitement, she held the newspaper towards her
companion, pointing to the proclamation of a Colonial Governor,
already mentioned.

"Bless you, Judith!" answered the other laughing, "you might as
well ask me to print that - or, for that matter to write it.  My
edication has been altogether in the woods; the only book I read,
or care about reading, is the one which God has opened afore all
his creatur's in the noble forests, broad lakes, rolling rivers,
blue skies, and the winds and tempests, and sunshine, and other
glorious marvels of the land!  This book I can read, and I find it
full of wisdom and knowledge."

"I crave your pardon, Deerslayer," said Judith, earnestly, more
abashed than was her wont, in finding that she had in advertently
made an appeal that might wound her compan ion's pride.  "I had
forgotten your manner of life, and least of all did I wish to hurt
your feelings."

"Hurt my feelin's?  Why should it hurt my feelin's to ask me to
read, when I can't read.  I'm a hunter - and I may now begin to
say a warrior, and no missionary, and therefore books and papers
are of no account with such as I -No, no -Judith," and here the
young man laughed cordially, "not even for wads, seeing that your
true deerkiller always uses the hide of a fa'a'n, if he's got one,
or some other bit of leather suitably prepared.  There's some that
do say, all that stands in print is true, in which case I'll own an
unl'arned man must be somewhat of a loser; nevertheless, it can't
be truer than that which God has printed with his own hand in the
sky, and the woods, and the rivers, and the springs."

"Well, then, Hutter, or Hovey, was a pirate, and being no father
of mine, I cannot wish to call him one.  His name shall no longer
be my name."

"If you dislike the name of that man, there's the name of your
mother, Judith.  Her'n may sarve you just as good a turn."

"I do not know it.  I've look'd through those papers, Deerslayer,
in the hope of finding some hint by which I might discover who my
mother was, but there is no more trace of the past, in that respect,
than the bird leaves in the air."

"That's both oncommon, and onreasonable.  Parents are bound to give
their offspring a name, even though they give 'em nothing else.  Now
I come of a humble stock, though we have white gifts and a white
natur', but we are not so poorly off as to have no name.  Bumppo
we are called, and I've heard it said - " a touch of human vanity
glowing on his cheek, "that the time has been when the Bumppos had
more standing and note among mankind than they have just now."

"They never deserved them more, Deerslayer, and the name is a good
one; either Hetty, or myself, would a thousand times rather be
called Hetty Bumppo, or Judith Bumppo, than to be called Hetty or
Judith Hutter."

"That's a moral impossible," returned the hunter, good humouredly,
"onless one of you should so far demean herself as to marry me."

Judith could not refrain from smiling, when she found how simply
and naturally the conversation had come round to the very point
at which she had aimed to bring it.  Although far from unfeminine
or forward, either in her feelings or her habits, the girl was
goaded by a sense of wrongs not altogether merited, incited by the
hopelessness of a future that seemed to contain no resting place,
and still more influenced by feelings that were as novel to her
as they proved to be active and engrossing.  The opening was too
good, therefore, to be neglected, though she came to the subject
with much of the indirectness and perhaps justifiable address of
a woman.

"I do not think Hetty will ever marry, Deerslayer," she said, "and
if your name is to be borne by either of us, it must be borne by
me."

"There's been handsome women too, they tell me, among the Bumppos,
Judith, afore now, and should you take up with the name, oncommon
as you be in this particular, them that knows the family won't be
altogether surprised."

"This is not talking as becomes either of us, Deerslayer, for
whatever is said on such a subject, between man and woman, should
be said seriously and in sincerity of heart.  Forgetting the shame
that ought to keep girls silent until spoken to, in most cases, I
will deal with you as frankly as I know one of your generous nature
will most like to be dealt by.  Can you - do you think, Deerslayer,
that you could be happy with such a wife as a woman like myself
would make?"

"A woman like you, Judith!  But where's the sense in trifling
about such a thing?  A woman like you, that is handsome enough to
be a captain's lady, and fine enough, and so far as I know edicated
enough, would be little apt to think of becoming my wife.  I suppose
young gals that feel themselves to be smart, and know themselves
to be handsome, find a sartain satisfaction in passing their jokes
ag'in them that's neither, like a poor Delaware hunter."

This was said good naturedly, but not without a betrayal of feeling
which showed that something like mortified sensibility was blended
with the reply.  Nothing could have occurred more likely to awaken
all Judith's generous regrets, or to aid her in her purpose, by
adding the stimulant of a disinterested desire to atone to her other
impulses, and cloaking all under a guise so winning and natural, as
greatly to lessen the unpleasant feature of a forwardness unbecoming
the sex.

"You do me injustice if you suppose I have any such thought, or
wish,"  she answered, earnestly.  "Never was I more serious in my
life, or more willing to abide by any agreement that we may make
to-night.  I have had many suit ors, Deerslayer - nay, scarce
an unmarried trapper or hunter has been in at the Lake these four
years, who has not offered to take me away with him, and
I fear some that were married, too - "

"Ay, I'll warrant that!" interrupted the other - "I'll warrant all
that!  Take 'em as a body, Judith, 'arth don't hold a set of men
more given to theirselves, and less given to God and the law."

"Not one of them would I - could I listen to; happily for myself
perhaps, has it been that such was the case.  There have been
well looking youths among them too, as you may have seen in your
acquaintance, Henry March."

"Yes, Harry is sightly to the eye, though, to my idees, less so to
the judgment.  I thought, at first, you meant to have him, Judith,
I did; but afore he went, it was easy enough to verify that the
same lodge wouldn't be big enough for you both."

"You have done me justice in that at least, Deerslayer.  Hurry is
a man I could never marry, though he were ten times more comely
to the eye, and a hundred times more stout of heart than he really
is."

"Why not, Judith, why not?  I own I'm cur'ous to know why a youth
like Hurry shouldn't find favor with a maiden like you?"

"Then