 you shall know, Deerslayer," returned the girl, gladly availing
herself of the opportunity of indirectly extolling the qualities
which had so strongly interested her in her listener; hoping by
these means covertly to approach the subject nearest her heart.
"In the first place, looks in a man are of no importance with a
woman, provided he is manly, and not disfigured, or deformed."

"There I can't altogether agree with you," returned the other
thoughtfully, for he had a very humble opinion of his own personal
appearance; "I have noticed that the comeliest warriors commonly get
the best-looking maidens of the tribe for wives, and the Sarpent,
yonder, who is sometimes wonderful in his paint, is a gineral
favorite with all the Delaware young women, though he takes to
Hist, himself, as if she was the only beauty on 'arth!"

"It may be so with Indians; but it is different with white girls.
So long as a young man has a straight and manly frame, that promises
to make him able to protect a woman, and to keep want from the
door, it is all they ask of the figure.  Giants like Hurry may do
for grenadiers, but are of little account as lovers.  Then as to
the face, an honest look, one that answers for the heart within,
is of more value than any shape or colour, or eyes, or teeth, or
trifles like them.  The last may do for girls, but who thinks of
them at all, in a hunter, or a warrior, or a husband?  If there
are women so silly, Judith is not among them."

"Well, this is wonderful!  I always thought that handsome liked
handsome, as riches love riches!"

"It may be so with you men, Deerslayer, but it is not always
so with us women.  We like stout-hearted men, but we wish to see
them modest; sure on a hunt, or the war-path, ready to die for the
right, and unwilling to yield to the wrong.  Above all we wish for
honesty - tongues that are not used to say what the mind does not
mean, and hearts that feel a little for others, as well as for
themselves.  A true-hearted girl could die for such a husband!  while
the boaster, and the double-tongued suitor gets to be as hateful
to the sight, as he is to the mind."

Judith spoke bitterly, and with her usual force, but her listener
was too much struck with the novelty of the sensations he experienced
to advert to her manner.  There was something so soothing to the
humility of a man of his temperament, to hear qualities that he
could not but know he possessed himself, thus highly extolled by
the loveliest female he had ever beheld, that, for the moment, his
faculties seemed suspended in a natural and excusable pride.  Then
it was that the idea of the possibility of such a creature as Judith
becoming his companion for life first crossed his mind.  The image
was so pleasant, and so novel, that he continued completely absorbed
by it for more than a minute, totally regardless of the beautiful
reality that was seated before him, watching the expression of his
upright and truth-telling countenance with a keenness that gave her
a very fair, if not an absolutely accurate clue to his thoughts.
Never before had so pleasing a vision floated before the mind's
eye of the young hunter, but, accustomed most to practical things,
and little addicted to submitting to the power of his imagination,
even while possessed of so much true poetical feeling in connection
with natural objects in particular, he soon recovered his reason,
and smiled at his own weakness, as the fancied picture faded from
his mental sight, and left him the simple, untaught, but highly
moral being he was, seated in the Ark of Thomas Hutter, at midnight,
with the lovely countenance of its late owner's reputed daughter,
beaming on him with anxious scrutiny, by the light of the solitary
lamp.

"You're wonderful handsome, and enticing, and pleasing to look
on, Judith!" he exclaimed, in his simplicity, as fact resumed its
ascendency over fancy.  "Wonderful!  I do n't remember ever to
have seen so beautiful a gal, even among the Delawares; and I'm not
astonished that Hurry Harry went away soured as well as disapp'inted!"

"Would you have had me, Deerslayer, become the wife of such a man
as Henry March?"

"There's that which is in his favor, and there's that which is
ag'in him.  To my taste, Hurry wouldn't make the best of husbands,
but I fear that the tastes of most young women, hereaway, wouldn't
be so hard upon him."

"No - no -Judith without a name would never consent to be called
Judith March!  Anything would be better than that."

"Judith Bumppo wouldn't sound as well, gal; and there's many names
that would fall short of March, in pleasing the ear."

"Ah!  Deerslayer, the pleasantness of the sound, in such cases,
does n't come through the ear, but through the heart.  Everything
is agreeable, when the heart is satisfied.  Were Natty Bumppo,
Henry March, and Henry March, Natty Bumppo, I might think the name
of March better than it is; or were he, you, I should fancy the
name of Bumppo horrible!"

"That's just it - yes, that's the reason of the matter.  Now, I'm
nat'rally avarse to sarpents, and I hate even the word, which,
the missionaries tell me, comes from human natur', on account of
a sartain sarpent at the creation of the 'arth, that outwitted the
first woman; yet, ever since Chingachgook has 'arned the title he
bears, why the sound is as pleasant to my ears as the whistle of
the whippoorwill of a calm evening - it is.  The feelin's make all
the difference in the world, Judith, in the natur' of sounds; ay,
even in that of looks, too."

"This is so true, Deerslayer, that I am surprised you should think
it remarkable a girl, who may have some comeliness herself, should
not think it necessary that her husband should have the same
advantage, or what you fancy an advantage.  To me, looks in a man
is nothing provided his countenance be as honest as his heart."

"Yes, honesty is a great advantage, in the long run; and they that
are the most apt to forget it in the beginning, are the most apt
to l'arn it in the ind.  Nevertheless, there's more, Judith, that
look to present profit than to the benefit that is to come after
a time.  One they think a sartainty, and the other an onsartainty.
I'm glad, howsever, that you look at the thing in its true light,
and not in the way in which so many is apt to deceive themselves."

"I do thus look at it, Deerslayer," returned the girl with emphasis,
still shrinking with a woman's sensitiveness from a direct offer of
her hand, "and can say, from the bottom of my heart, that I would
rather trust my happiness to a man whose truth and feelings may be
depended on, than to a false-tongued and false-hearted wretch that
had chests of gold, and houses and lands - yes, thought he were
even seated on a throne!"

"These are brave words, Judith; they're downright brave words;
but do you think that the feelin's would keep 'em company, did the
ch'ice actually lie afore you?  If a gay gallant in a scarlet coat
stood on one side, with his head smelling like a deer's foot, his
face smooth and blooming as your own, his hands as white and soft
as if God hadn't bestowed 'em that man might live by the sweat of
his brow, and his step as lofty as dancing-teachers and a light
heart could make it; and the other side stood one that has passed
his days in the open air till his forehead is as red as his cheek;
had cut his way through swamps and bushes till his hand was as rugged
as the oaks he slept under; had trodden on the scent of game till
his step was as stealthy as the catamount's, and had no other
pleasant odor about him than such as natur' gives in the free air
and the forest - now, if both these men stood here, as suitors for
your feelin's, which do you think would win your favor?"

Judith's fine face flushed, for the picture that her companion had
so simply drawn of a gay officer of the garrisons had once been
particularly grateful to her imagination, though experience and
disappointment had not only chilled all her affections, but given
them a backward current, and the passing image had a momentary
influence on her feelings; but the mounting colour was succeeded
by a paleness so deadly, as to make her appear ghastly.

"As God is my judge," the girl solemnly answered, "did both these
men stand before me, as I may say one of them does, my choice, if
I know my own heart, would be the latter.  I have no wish for a
husband who is any way better than myself."

"This is pleasant to listen to, and might lead a young man in time
to forget his own onworthiness, Judith!  Howsever, you hardly think
all that you say.  A man like me is too rude and ignorant for one
that has had such a mother to teach her.  Vanity is nat'ral, I do
believe, but vanity like that, would surpass reason."

"Then you do not know of what a woman's heart is capable!  Rude
you are not, Deerslayer, nor can one be called ignorant that has
studied what is before his eyes as closely as you have done.  When
the affections are concerned, all things appear in their pleasantest
colors, and trifles are overlooked, or are forgotten.  When the
heart feels sunshine, nothing is gloomy, even dull looking objects,
seeming gay and bright, and so it would be between you and the
woman who should love you, even though your wife might happen, in
some matters, to possess what the world calls the advantage over
you." "Judith, you come of people altogether above mine, in the
world, and onequal matches, like onequal fri'ndships can't often
tarminate kindly.  I speak of this matter altogether as a fanciful
thing, since it's not very likely that you, at least, would be apt
to treat it as a matter that can ever come to pass."


Judith fastened her deep blue eyes on the open, frank countenance
of her companion, as if she would read his soul.  Nothing there
betrayed any covert meaning, and she was obliged to admit to herself,
that he regarded the conversation as argumentative, rather than
positive, and that he was still without any active suspicion that
her feelings were seriously involved in the issue.  At first, she
felt offended; then she saw the injustice of making the self-abasement
and modesty of the hunter a charge against him, and this novel
difficulty gave a piquancy to the state of affairs that rather
increased her interest in the young man.  At that critical instant,
a change of plan flashed on her mind, and with a readiness of
invention that is peculiar to the quick-witted and ingenious, she
adopted a scheme by which she hoped effectually to bind him to her
person.  This scheme partook equally of her fertility of invention,
and of the decision and boldness of her character.  That the
conversation might not terminate too abruptly, however, or any
suspicion of her design exist, she answered the last remark of
Deerslayer, as earnestly and as truly as if her original intention
remained unaltered.

"I, certainly, have no reason to boast of parentage, after what I
have seen this night," said the girl, in a saddened voice.  "I had
a mother, it is true; but of her name even, I am ignorant - and,
as for my father, it is better, perhaps, that I should never know
who he was, lest I speak too bitterly of him!"

"Judith," said Deerslayer, taking her hand kindly, and with a manly
sincerity that went directly to the girl's heart, "tis better to
say no more to-night.  Sleep on what you've seen and felt; in the
morning things that now look gloomy, may look more che'rful.  Above
all, never do anything in bitterness, or because you feel as if you'd
like to take revenge on yourself for other people's backslidings.
All that has been said or done atween us, this night, is your
secret, and shall never be talked of by me, even with the Sarpent,
and you may be sartain if he can't get it out of me no man can.  If
your parents have been faulty, let the darter be less so; remember
that you're young, and the youthful may always hope for better
times; that you're more quick-witted than usual, and such gin'rally
get the better of difficulties, and that, as for beauty, you're
oncommon, which is an advantage with all.  It is time to get a
little rest, for to-morrow is like to prove a trying day to some
of us."

Deerslayer arose as he spoke, and Judith had no choice but to comply.
The chest was closed and secured, and they parted in silence, she
to take her place by the side of Hist and Hetty, and he to seek
a blanket on the floor of the cabin he was in.  It was not five
minutes crc the young man was in a deep sleep, but the girl continued
awake for a long time.  She scarce knew whether to lament, or to
rejoice, at having failed in making herself understood.  On the
one hand were her womanly sensibilities spared; on the other was
the disappointment of defeated, or at least of delayed expectations,
and the uncertainty of a future that looked so dark.  Then came
the new resolution, and the bold project for the morrow, and when
drowsiness finally shut her eyes, they closed on a scene of success
and happiness, that was pictured by the fancy, under the influence
of a sanguine temperament, and a happy invention.



Chapter XXV


"But, mother, now a shade has past, Athwart my brightest visions
here, A cloud of darkest gloom has wrapt, The remnant of my brief
career!  No song, no echo can I win, The sparkling fount has died
within."

Margaret Davidson, "To my Mother," 11.  7-12.

Hist and Hetty arose with the return of light, leaving Judith still
buried in sleep.  It took but a minute for the first to complete
her toilet.  Her long coal-black hair was soon adjusted in a simple
knot, the calico dress belted tight to her slender waist, and her
little feet concealed in their gaudily ornamented moccasins.  When
attired, she left her companion employed in household affairs, and
went herself on the platform to breathe the pure air of the morning.
Here she found Chingachgook studying the shores of the lake, the
mountains and the heavens, with the sagacity of a man of the woods,
and the gravity of an Indian.

The meeting between the two lovers was simple, but affectionate.
The chief showed a manly kindness, equally removed from boyish
weakness and haste, while the girl betrayed, in her smile and half
averted looks, the bashful tenderness of her sex.  Neither spoke,
unless it were with the eyes, though each understood the other as
fully as if a vocabulary of words and protestations had been poured
out.  Hist seldom appeared to more advantage than at that moment,
for just from her rest and ablutions, there was a freshness about
her youthful form and face that the toils of the wood do not always
permit to be exhibited, by even the juvenile and pretty.  Then
Judith had not only imparted some of her own skill in the toilet,
during their short intercourse, but she had actually bestowed a
few well selected ornaments from her own stores, that contributed
not a little to set off the natural graces of the Indian maid.  All
this the lover saw and felt, and for a moment his countenance was
illuminated with a look of pleasure, but it soon grew grave again,
and became saddened and anxious.  The stools used the previous
night were still standing on the platform; placing two against the
walls of the hut, he seated himself on one, making a gesture to his
companion to take the other.  This done, he continued thoughtful
and silent for quite a minute, maintaining the reflecting dignity
of one born to take his seat at the council-fire, while Hist was
furtively watching the expression of his face, patient and submissive,
as became a woman of her people.  Then the young warrior stretched
his arm before him, as if to point out the glories of the scene at
that witching hour, when the whole panorama, as usual, was adorned
by the mellow distinctness of early morning, sweeping with his
hand slowly over lake, hills and heavens.  The girl followed the
movement with pleased wonder, smiling as each new beauty met her
gaze.

"Hugh!" exclaimed the chief, in admiration of a scene so unusual
even to him, for this was the first lake he had ever beheld.  "This
is the country of the Manitou!  It is too good for Mingos, Hist;
but the curs of that tribe are howling in packs through the woods.
They think that the Delawares are asleep, over the mountains."

"All but one of them is, Chingachgook.  There is one here; and he
is of the blood of Uncas!"

"What is one warrior against a tribe?  The path to our villages is
very long and crooked, and we shall travel it under a cloudy sky.
I am afraid, too, Honeysuckle of the Hills, that we shall travel
it alone!"

Hist understood the allusion, and it made her sad; though it sounded
sweet to her ears to be compared, by the warrior she so loved, to
the most fragrant and the pleasantest of all the wild flowers of
her native woods.  Still she continued silent, as became her when
the allusion was to a grave interest that men could best control,
though it exceeded the power of education to conceal the smile that
gratified feeling brought to her pretty mouth.

"When the sun is thus," continued the Delaware, pointing to the
zenith, by simply casting upward a hand and finger, by a play of
the wrist, "the great hunter of our tribe will go back to the Hurons
to be treated like a bear, that they roast and skin even on full
stomachs."

"The Great Spirit may soften their hearts, and not suffer them to
be so bloody minded.  I have lived among the Hurons, and know them.
They have hearts, and will not forget their own children, should
they fall into the hands of the Delawares."

"A wolf is forever howling; a hog will always eat.  They have
lost warriors; even their women will call out for vengeance.  The
pale-face has the eyes of an eagle, and can see into a Mingo's
heart; he looks for no mercy.  There is a cloud over his spirit,
though it is not before his face."

A long, thoughtful pause succeeded, during which Hist stealthily
took the hand of the chief, as if seeking his support, though she
scarce ventured to raise her eyes to a countenance that was now
literally becoming terrible, under the conflicting passions and
stern resolution that were struggling in the breast of its owner.

"What will the Son of Uncas do?" the girl at length timidly asked.
"He is a chief, and is already celebrated in council, though so
young; what does his heart tell him is wisest; does the head, too,
speak the same words as the heart?"

"What does Wah-ta-Wah say, at a moment when my dearest friend is
in such danger.  The smallest birds sing the sweetest; it is always
pleasant to hearken to their songs.  I wish I could hear the Wren
of the Woods in my difficulty; its note would reach deeper than
the ear."

Again Hist experienced the profound gratification that the language
of praise can always awaken when uttered by those we love.  The
'Honeysuckle of the Hills' was a term often applied to the girl by
the young men of the Delawares, though it never sounded so sweet
in her ears as from the lips of Chingachgook; but the latter alone
had ever styled her the Wren of the Woods.  With him, however, it
had got to be a familiar phrase, and it was past expression pleasant
to the listener, since it conveyed to her mind the idea that her
advice and sentiments were as acceptable to her future husband, as
the tones of her voice and modes of conveying them were agreeable;
uniting the two things most prized by an Indian girl, as coming
from her betrothed, admiration for a valued physical advantage,
with respect for her opinion.  She pressed the hand she
held between both her own, and answered -

"Wah-ta-Wah says that neither she nor the Great Serpent could ever
laugh again, or ever sleep without dreaming of the Hurons, should
the Deerslayer die under a Mingo tomahawk, and they do nothing to
save him.  She would rather go back, and start on her long path
alone, than let such a dark cloud pass before her happiness."

"Good!  The husband and the wife will have but one heart; they will
see with the same eyes, and feel with the same feelings."

What further was said need not be related here.  That the conversation
was of Deerslayer, and his hopes, has been seen already, but the
decision that was come to will better appear in the course of the
narrative.  The youthful pair were yet conversing when the sun
appeared above the tops of the pines, and the light of a brilliant
American day streamed down into the valley, bathing "in deep joy"
the lake, the forests and the mountain sides.  Just at this instant
Deerslayer came out of the cabin of the Ark and stepped upon the
platform.  His first look was at the cloudless heavens, then his
rapid glance took in the entire panorama of land and water, when
he had leisure for a friendly nod at his friends, and a cheerful
smile for Hist.

"Well," he said, in his usual, composed manner, and pleasant voice,
"he that sees the sun set in the west, and wakes 'arly enough in
the morning will be sartain to find him coming back ag'in in the
east, like a buck that is hunted round his ha'nt.  I dare say, now,
Hist, you've beheld this, time and ag'in, and yet it never entered
into your galish mind to ask the reason?"

Both Chingachgook and his betrothed looked up at the luminary, with
an air that betokened sudden wonder, and then they gazed at each
other, as if to seek the solution of the difficulty.  Familiarity
deadens the sensibilities even as connected with the gravest natural
phenomena, and never before had these simple beings thought of
enquiring into a movement that was of daily occurrence, however
puzzling it might appear on investigation.  When the subject was
thus suddenly started, it struck both alike, and at the same instant,
with some such force, as any new and brilliant proposition in the
natural sciences would strike the scholar.  Chingachgook alone saw
fit to answer.

"The pale-faces know everything," he said; "can they tell us why
the sun hides his face, when he goes back, at night."

"ay, that is downright red-skin l'arnin'" returned the other,
laughing, through he was not altogether insensible to the pleasure
of proving the superiority of his race by solving the difficulty,
which he set about doing in his own peculiar manner.  "Harkee, Sarpent,"
he continued more gravely, though too simply for affectation; "this
is easierly explained than an Indian brain may fancy.  The sun,
while he seems to keep traveling in the heavens, never budges, but
it is the 'arth that turns round, and any one can understand, if
he is placed on the side of a mill-wheel, for instance, when it's
in motion, that he must some times see the heavens, while he is
at other times under water.  There's no great secret in that; but
plain natur'; the difficulty being in setting the 'arth in motion."

"How does my brother know that the earth turns round?" demanded
the Indian.  "Can he see it?"

"Well, that's been a puzzler, I will own, Delaware, for I've
often tried, but never could fairly make it out.  Sometimes I've
often tried, but never could fairly make it out.  Sometimes I've
consaited that I could; and then ag'in, I've been obliged to own
it an onpossibility.  Howsever, turn it does, as all my people say,
and you ought to believe 'em, since they can foretell eclipses,
and other prodigies, that used to fill the tribes with terror,
according to your own traditions of such things."

"Good.  This is true; no red man will deny it.  When a wheel turns,
my eyes can see it - they do not see the earth turn."

"Ay, that's what I call sense obstinacy!  Seeing is believing,
they say, and what they can't see, some men won't in the least give
credit to.  Neverthless, chief, that isn't quite as good reason
as it mayat first seem.  You believe in the Great Spirit, I know,
and yet, I conclude, it would puzzle you to show where you see
him!"

"Chingachgook can see Him everywhere - everywhere in good things
-the Evil Spirit in bad.  Here, in the lake; there, in the forest;
yonder, in the clouds; in Hist, in the Son of Uncas, in Tannemund,
in Deerslayer.  The Evil Spirit is in the Mingos.  That I see; I
do not see the earth turn round."

"I don't wonder they call you the Sarpent, Delaware; no, I don't!
There's always a meaning in your words, and there's often a meaning
in your countenance, too!  Notwithstanding, your answers doesn't
quite meet my idée.  That God is observable in all nat'ral objects
is allowable, but then he is not perceptible in the way I mean.
You know there is a Great Spirit by his works, and the pale-faces
know that the 'arth turns round by its works.  This is the reason
of the matter, though how it is to be explained is more than I can
exactly tell you.  This I know; all my people consait that fact,
and what all the pale-faces consait, is very likely to be true."

"When the sun is in the top of that pine to-morrow, where will my
brother Deerslayer be?"

The hunter started, and he looked intently, though totally without
alarm, at his friend.  Then he signed for him to follow, and led
the way into the Ark, where he mght pursue the subject unheard by
those whose feelings he feared might get the mastery over their
reason.  Here he stopped, and pursued the conversation in a more
confidential tone.

"'Twas a little onreasonable in you Sarpent," he said, "to bring
up such a subject afore Hist, and when the young women of my own
colour might overhear what was said.  Yes, 'twas a little more
onreasonable than most things that you do.  No matter; Hist didn't
comprehend, and the other didn't hear.  Howsever, the question is
easier put than answered.  No mortal can say where he will be when
the sun rises tomorrow.  I will ask you the same question, Sarpent,
and should like to hear what answer you can give."

"Chingachgook will be with his friend Deerslayer - if he be in
the land of spirits, the Great Serpent will crawl at his side; if
beneath yonder sun, its warmth and light shall fall on both."

"I understand you, Delaware," returned the other, touched with the
simple self-devotion of his friend, "Such language is as plain in
one tongue as in another.  I comes from the heart, and goes to the
heart, too.  'Tis well to think so, and it may be well to say so,
for that matter, but it would not be well to do so, Sarpent.  You
are no longer alone in life, for though you have the lodges to change,
and other ceremonies to go through, afore Hist becomes you lawful
wife, yet are you as good as married in all that bears on the
feelin's, and joy, and misery.  No - no - Hist must not be desarted,
because a cloud is passing atween you and me, a little onexpectedly
and a little darker than we may have looked for."

"Hist is a daughter of the Mohicans.  She knows how to obey her
husband.  Where he goes, she will follow.  Both will be with the
Great Hunter of the Delawares, when the sun shall be in the pine
to-morrow."

"The Lord bless and protect you!  Chief, this is downright madness.
Can either, or both of you, alter a Mingo natur'?  Will your grand
looks, or Hist's tears and beauty, change a wolf into a squirrel,
or make a catamount as innocent as a fa'an?  No - Sarpent, you
will think better of this matter, and leave me in the hands of
God.  A'ter all, it's by no means sartain that the scamps design
the torments, for they may yet be pitiful, and bethink them of the
wickedness of such a course - though it is but a hopeless expectation
to look forward to a Mingo's turning aside from evil, and letting
marcy get uppermost in his heart.  Nevertheless, no one knows to a
sartainty what will happen, and young creatur's, like Hist, a'n't
to be risked on onsartainties.  This marrying is altogether a
different undertaking from what some young men fancy.  Now, if you
was single, or as good as single, Delaware, I should expect you
to be actyve and stirring about the camp of the vagabonds, from
sunrise to sunset, sarcumventing and contriving, as restless as
a hound off the scent, and doing all manner of things to help me,
and to distract the inimy, but two are oftener feebler than one,
and we must take things as they are, and not as we want 'em to be."

"Listen, Deerslayer," returned the Indian with an emphasis so
decided as to show how much he was in earnest.  "If Chingachgook
was in the hands of the Hurons, what would my pale-face brother do?
Sneak off to the Delaware villages, and say to the chiefs, and old
men, and young warriors - 'see, here is Wah-ta-Wah; she is safe,
but a little tired; and here is the Son of Uncas, not as tired as
the Honeysuckle, being stronger, but just as safe.' Would he do
this?"

"Well, that's oncommon ingen'ous; it's cunning enough for a Mingo,
himself!  The Lord only knows what put it into your head to ask
such a question.  What would I do?  Why, in the first place, Hist
wouldn't be likely to be in my company at all, for she would stay as
near you as possible, and therefore all that part about her couldn't
be said without talking nonsense.  As for her being tired, that
would fall through too, if she didn't go, and no part of your speech
would be likely to come from me; so, you see, Sarpent, reason is
ag'in you, and you may as well give it up, since to hold out ag'in
reason, is no way becoming a chief of your character and repitation."

"My brother is not himself; he forgets that he is talking to one
who has sat at the Council Fire of his nation," returned the other
kindly.  "When men speak, they should say that which does not
go in at one side of the head and out at the other.  Their words
shouldn't be feathers, so light that a wind which does not ruffle
the water can blow them away.  He has not answered my question;
when a chief puts a question, his friend should not talk of other
things."

"I understand you, Delaware; I understand well enough what you
mean, and truth won't allow me to say otherwise.  Still it's not
as easy to answer as you seem to think, for this plain reason.  You
wish me to say what I would do if I had a betrothed as you have,
here, on the lake, and a fri'nd yonder in the Huron camp, in danger
of the torments.  That's it, isn't it?"

The Indian bowed his head silently, and always with unmoved gravity,
though his eye twinkled at the sight of the other's embarrassment.

"Well, I never had a betrothed - never had the kind of feelin's
toward any young woman that you have towards Hist, though the Lord
knows my feelin's are kind enough towards 'em all!  Still my heart,
as they call it in such matters, isn't touched, and therefore I
can't say what I would do.  A fri'nd pulls strong, that I know by
exper'ence, Sarpent, but, by all that I've seen and heard consarning
love, I'm led to think that a betrothed pulls stronger."

"True; but the betrothed of Chingachgook does not pull towards the
lodges of the Delawares; she pulls towards the camp of the Hurons."

"She's a noble gal, for all her little feet, and hands that an't
bigger than a child's, and a voice that is as pleasant as a mocker's;
she's a noble gal, and like the stock of her sires!  Well, what is
it, Sarpent; for I conclude she hasn't changed her mind, and means
to give herself up, and turn Huron wife.  What is it you want?"

"Wah-ta-Wah will never live in the wigwam of an Iroquois," answered
the Delaware drily.  "She has little feet, but they can carry her
to the villages of her people; she has small hands, too, but her
mind is large.  My brother will see what we can do, when the time
shall come, rather than let him die under Mingo torments."

"Attempt nothing heedlessly, Delaware," said the other earnestly;
"I suppose you must and will have your way; and, on the whole it's
right you should, for you'd neither be happy, unless something
was undertaken.  But attempt nothing heedlessly - I didn't expect
you'd quit the lake, while my matter remained in unsartainty,
but remember, Sarpent, that no torments that Mingo ingenuity can
invent, no ta'ntings and revilings; no burnings and roastings and
nail-tearings, nor any other onhuman contrivances can so soon break
down my spirit, as to find that you and Hist have fallen into the
power of the inimy in striving to do something for my good."

"The Delawares are prudent.  The Deerslayer will not find them
running into a strange camp with their eyes shut."

Here the dialogue terminated.  Hetty announced that the breakfast
was ready, and the whole party was soon seated around the simple
board, in the usual primitive manner of borderers.  Judith was the
last to take her seat, pale, silent, and betraying in her countenance
that she had passed a painful, if not a sleepless, night.  At this
meal scarce a syllable was exchanged, all the females manifesting
want of appetites, though the two men were unchanged in this
particular.  It was early when the party arose, and there still
remained several hours before it would be necessary for the prisoner
to leave his friends.  The knowledge of this circumstance, and the
interest all felt in his welfare, induced the whole to assemble on
the platform again, in the desire to be near the expected victim,
to listen to his discourse, and if possible to show their interest
in him by anticipating his wishes.  Deerslayer, himself, so
far as human eyes could penetrate, was wholly unmoved, conversing
cheerfully and naturally, though he avoided any direct allusions
to the expected and great event of the day.  If any evidence could
be discovered of his thought's reverting to that painful subject at
all, it was in the manner in which he spoke of death and the last
great change.

"Grieve not, Hetty," he said, for it was while consoling this
simple-minded girl for the loss of her parents that he thus betrayed
his feelings, "since God has app'inted that all must die.  Your
parents, or them you fancied your parents, which is the same thing,
have gone afore you; this is only in the order of natur', my good
gal, for the aged go first, and the young follow.  But one that had
a mother like your'n, Hetty, can be at no loss to hope the best,
as to how matters will turn out in another world.  The Delaware,
here, and Hist, believe in happy hunting grounds, and have idees
befitting their notions and gifts as red-skins, but we who are
of white blood hold altogether to a different doctrine.  Still, I
rather conclude our heaven is their land of spirits, and that the
path which leads to it will be travelled by all colours alike.  Tis
onpossible for the wicked to enter on it, I will allow, but fri'nds
can scarce be separated, though they are not of the same race on
'arth.  Keep up your spirits, poor Hetty, and look forward to the
day when you will meet your mother ag'in, and that without pain,
or sorrowing."

"I do expect to see mother," returned the truth-telling and simple
girl, "but what will become of father?"

"That's a non-plusser, Delaware," said the hunter, in the Indian
dialect -"yes, that is a downright non-plusser!  The Muskrat was
not a saint on 'arth, and it's fair to guess he'll not be much of
one, hereafter!  Howsever, Hetty," dropping into the English by an
easy transition, "howsever, Hetty, we must all hope for the best.
That is wisest, and it is much the easiest to the mind, if one can
only do it.  I ricommend to you, trusting to God, and putting down
all misgivings and fainthearted feelin's.  It's wonderful, Judith,
how different people have different notions about the futur', some
fancying one change, and some fancying another.  I've known white
teachers that have thought all was spirit, hereafter, and them,
ag'in, that believed the body will be transported to another world,
much as the red-skins themselves imagine, and that we shall walk
about in the flesh, and know each other, and talk together, and be
fri'nds there as we've been fri'nds here."

"Which of these opinions is most pleasing to you, Deerslayer?"
asked the girl, willing to indulge his melancholy mood, and far from
being free from its influence herself.  "Would it be disagreeable
to think that you should meet all who are now on this platform in
another world?  Or have you known enough of us here, to be glad to
see us no more.

"The last would make death a bitter portion; yes it would.  It's
eight good years since the Sarpent and I began to hunt together,
and the thought that we were never to meet ag'in would be a hard
thought to me.  He looks forward to the time when he shall chase a
sort of spirit-deer, in company, on plains where there's no thorns,
or brambles, or marshes, or other hardships to overcome, whereas
I can't fall into all these notions, seeing that they appear to be
ag'in reason.  Spirits can't eat, nor have they any use for clothes,
and deer can only rightfully be chased to be slain, or slain, unless
it be for the venison or the hides.  Now, I find it hard to suppose
that blessed spirits can be put to chasing game without an object,
tormenting the dumb animals just for the pleasure and agreeableness
of their own amusements.  I never yet pulled a trigger on buck or
doe, Judith, unless when food or clothes was wanting."

"The recollection of which, Deerslayer, must now be a great
consolation to you."

"It is the thought of such things, my fri'nds, that enables a man
to keep his furlough.  It might be done without it, I own; for
the worst red-skins sometimes do their duty in this matter; but it
makes that which might otherwise be hard, easy, if not altogether
to our liking.  Nothing truly makes a bolder heart than a light
conscience."

Judith turned paler than ever, but she struggled for self-command,
and succeeded in obtaining it.  The conflict had been severe,
however, and it left her so little disposed to speak that Hetty
pursued the subject.  This was done in the simple manner natural
to the girl.

"It would be cruel to kill the poor deer," she said, "in this
world, or any other, when you don't want their venison, or their
skins.  No good white man, and no good red man would do it.  But
it's wicked for a Christian to talk about chasing anything in
heaven.  Such things are not done before the face of God, and the
missionary that teaches these doctrines can't be a true missionary.
He must be a wolf in sheep's clothing.  I suppose you know what a
sheep is, Deerslayer."

"That I do, gal, and a useful creatur' it is, to such as like cloths
better than skins for winter garments.  I understand the natur' of
sheep, though I've had but little to do with 'em, and the natur'
of wolves too, and can take the idee of a wolf in the fleece of a
sheep, though I think it would be like to prove a hot jacket for
such a beast, in the warm months!"

"And sin and hypocrisy are hot jackets, as they will find who put
them on," returned Hetty, positively, "so the wolf would be no worse
off than the sinner.  Spirits don't hunt, nor trap, nor fish, nor
do anything that vain men undertake, since they've none of the
longings of this world to feed.  Oh!  Mother told me all that,
years ago, and I don't wish to hear it denied."

"Well, my good Hetty, in that case you'd better not broach your
doctrine to Hist, when she and you are alone, and the young Delaware
maiden is inclined to talk religion.  It's her fixed idee, I know,
that the good warriors do nothing but hunt and fish in the other
world, though I don't believe that she fancies any of them are
brought down to trapping, which is no empl'yment for a brave.  But
of hunting and fishing, accordin' to her notion, they've their
fill, and that, too, over the most agreeablest hunting grounds, and
among game that is never out of season, and which is just actyve
and instinctyve enough to give a pleasure to death.  So I wouldn't
ricommend it to you to start Hist on that idee."

"Hist can't be so wicked as to believe any such thing," returned
the other, earnestly.  "No Indian hunts after he is dead."

"No wicked Indian, I grant you; no wicked Indian, sartainly.  He
is obliged to carry the ammunition, and to look on without sharing
in the sport, and to cook, and to light the fires, and to do every
thing that isn't manful.  Now, mind; I don't tell you these are my
idees, but they are Hist's idees, and, therefore, for the sake of
peace the less you say to her ag'in 'em, the better."

"And what are your ideas of the fate of an Indian, in the other
world?" demanded Judith, who had just found her voice.

"Ah!  gal, any thing but that!  I am too Christianized to expect
any thing so fanciful as hunting and fishing after death, nor do
I believe there is one Manitou for the red-skin and another for
a pale-face.  You find different colours on 'arth, as any one may
see, but you don't find different natur's.  Different gifts, but
only one natur'."

"In what is a gift different from a nature?  Is not nature itself
a gift from God?"

"Sartain; that's quick-thoughted, and creditable, Judith, though the
main idee is wrong.  A natur' is the creatur' itself; its wishes,
wants, idees and feelin's, as all are born in him.  This natur' never
can be changed, in the main, though it may undergo some increase,
or lessening.  Now, gifts come of sarcumstances.  Thus, if you put
a man in a town, he gets town gifts; in a settlement, settlement
gifts; in a forest, gifts of the woods.  A soldier has soldierly
gifts, and a missionary preaching gifts.  All these increase and
strengthen, until they get to fortify natur', as it might be, and
excuse a thousand acts and idees.  Still the creatur' is the same
at the bottom; just as a man who is clad in regimentals is the same
as the man that is clad in skins.  The garments make a change to
the eye, and some change in the conduct, perhaps; but none in the
man.  Herein lies the apology for gifts; seein' that you expect
different conduct from one in silks and satins, from one in homespun;
though the Lord, who didn't make the dresses, but who made the
creatur's themselves, looks only at his own work.  This isn't ra'al
missionary doctrine, but it's as near it as a man of white colour
need be.  Ah's!  me; little did I think to be talking of such matters,
to-day, but it's one of our weaknesses never to know what will come
to pass.  Step into the Ark with me, Judith, for a minute; I wish
to convarse with you."

Judith complied with a willingness she could scarce conceal.
Following the hunter into the cabin, she took a seat on a stool,
while the young man brought Killdeer, the rifle she had given him,
out of a corner, and placed himself on another, with the weapon
laid upon his knees.  After turning the piece round and round,
and examining its lock and its breech with a sort of affectionate
assiduity, he laid it down and proceeded to the subject which had
induced him to desire the interview.

"I understand you, Judith, to say that you gave me this rifle,"
he said.  "I agreed to take it, because a young woman can have no
particular use for firearms.  The we'pon has a great name, and it
desarves it, and ought of right to be carried by some known and
sure hand, for the best repitation may be lost by careless and
thoughtless handling."

'Can it be in better hands than those in which it is now, Deerslayer?
Thomas Hutter seldom missed with it; with you it must turn out to
be -"

"Sartain death!" interrupted the hunter, laughing.  "I once know'd
a beaver-man that had a piece he called by that very name, but
'twas all boastfulness, for I've seen Delawares that were as true
with arrows, at a short range.  Howsever, I'll not deny my gifts -
for this is a gift, Judith, and not natur' -but, I'll not deny my
gifts, and therefore allow that the rifle couldn't well be in better
hands than it is at present.  But, how long will it be likely to
remain there?  Atween us, the truth may be said, though I shouldn't
like to have it known to the Sarpent and Hist; but, to you the
truth may be spoken, since your feelin's will not be as likely to
be tormented by it, as those of them that have known me longer and
better.  How long am I like to own this rifle or any other?  That
is a serious question for our thoughts to rest on, and should that
happen which is so likely to happen, Killdeer would be without an
owner."

Judith listened with apparent composure, though the conflict within
came near overpowering her.  Appreciating the singular character
of her companion, however, she succeeded in appearing calm, though,
had not his attention been drawn exclusively to the rifle, a man
of his keenness of observation could scarce have failed to detect
the agony of mind with which the girl had hearkened to his words.
Her great self-command, notwithstanding, enabled her to pursue the
subject in a way still to deceive him.

"What would you have me do with the weapon," she asked, "should
that which you seem to expect take place?"

"That's just what I wanted to speak to you about, Judith; that's
just it.  There's Chingachgook, now, though far from being parfect
sartainty, with a rifle - for few red-skins ever get to be that
- though far from being parfect sartainty, he is respectable, and
is coming on.  Nevertheless, he is my fri'nd, and all the better
fri'nd, perhaps, because there never can be any hard feelin's atween
us, touchin' our gifts, his'n bein' red, and mine bein' altogether
white.  Now, I should like to leave Killdeer to the Sarpent, should
any thing happen to keep me from doing credit and honor to your
precious gift, Judith."

"Leave it to whom you please, Deerslayer.  The rifle is your own,
to do with as you please.  Chingachgook shall have it, should you
never return to claim it, if that be your wish."

"Has Hetty been consulted in this matter?  Property goes from the
parent to the children, and not to one child, in partic'lar!"

"If you place your right on that of the law, Deerslayer, I fear
none of us can claim to be the owner.  Thomas Hutter was no more
the father of Esther, than he was the father of Judith.  Judith
and Esther we are truly, having no other name!"

"There may be law in that, but there's no great reason, gal.
Accordin' to the custom of families, the goods are your'n, and
there's no one here to gainsay it.  If Hetty would only say that
she is willing, my mind would be quite at ease in the matter.  It's
true, Judith, that your sister has neither your beauty, nor your
wit; but we should be the tenderest of the rights and welfare of
the most weak-minded."

The girl made no answer but placing herself at a window, she summoned
her sister to her side.  When the question was put to Hetty, that
simple-minded and affectionate creature cheerfully assented to the
proposal to confer on Deerslayer a full right of ownership to the
much-coveted rifle.  The latter now seemed perfectly happy, for
the time being at least, and after again examining and re-examining
his prize, he expressed a determination to put its merits to a
practical test, before he left the spot.  No boy could have been
more eager to exhibit the qualities of his trumpet, or his crossbow,
than this simple forester was to prove those of his rifle.  Returning
to the platform, he first took the Delaware aside, and informed
him that this celebrated piece was to become his property, in the
event of any thing serious befalling himself.

"This is a new reason why you should he wary, Sarpent, and not run
into any oncalculated danger," the hunter added, "for, it will be
a victory of itself to a tribe to own such a piece as this!  The
Mingos will turn green with envy, and, what is more, they will not
ventur' heedlessly near a village where it is known to be kept.  So,
look well to it, Delaware, and remember that you've now to watch
over a thing that has all the valie of a creatur', without its
failin's.  Hist may be, and should be precious to you, but Killdeer
will have the love and veneration of your whole people."

"One rifle like another, Deerslayer," returned the Indian,
in English, the language used by the other, a little hurt at his
friend's lowering his betrothed to the level of a gun.  "All kill;
all wood and iron.  Wife dear to heart; rifle good to shoot."

"And what is a man in the woods without something to shoot with?
-a miserable trapper, or a forlorn broom and basket maker, at the
best.  Such a man may hoe corn, and keep soul and body together, but
he can never know the savory morsels of venison, or tell a bear's
ham from a hog's.  Come, my fri'nd, such another occasion may never
offer ag'in, and I feel a strong craving for a trial with this
celebrated piece.  You shall bring out your own rifle, and I will
just sight Killdeer in a careless way, in order that we may know
a few of its secret vartues."

As this proposition served to relieve the thoughts of the whole party,
by giving them a new direction, while it was likely to produce no
unpleasant results, every one was willing to enter into it; the
girls bringing forth the firearms with an alacrity bordering on
cheerfulness.  Hutter's armory was well supplied, possessing several
rifles, all of which were habitually kept loaded in readiness
to meet any sudden demand for their use.  On the present occasion
it only remained to freshen the primings, and each piece was in a
state for service.  This was soon done, as all assisted in it, the
females being as expert in this part of the system of defence as
their male companions.

"Now, Sarpent, we'll begin in a humble way, using Old Tom's commoners
first, and coming to your we'pon and Killdeer as the winding up
observations,"  said Deerslayer, delighted to be again, weapon in
hand, ready to display his skill.  "Here's birds in abundance, some
in, and some over the lake, and they keep at just a good range,
hovering round the hut.  Speak your mind, Delaware, and p'int out
the creatur' you wish to alarm.  Here's a diver nearest in, off
to the eastward, and that's a creatur' that buries itself at the
flash, and will be like enough to try both piece and powder."

Chingachgook was a man of few words.  No sooner was the bird pointed
out to him than he took his aim and fired.  The duck dove at the
flash, as had been expected, and the bullet skipped harmlessly
along the surface of the lake, first striking the water within a few
inches of the spot where the bird had so lately swam.  Deerslayer
laughed, cordially and naturally, but at the same time he threw
himself into an attitude of preparation and stood keenly watching
the sheet of placid water.  Presently a dark spot appeared, and
then the duck arose to breathe, and shook its wings.  While in this
act, a bullet passed directly through its breast, actually turning
it over lifeless on its back.  At the next moment, Deerslayer stood
with the breech of his rifle on the platform, as tranquil as if
nothing had happened, though laughing in his own peculiar manner.

"There's no great trial of the pieces in that!" he said, as if anxious
to prevent a false impression of his own merit.  "No, that proof's
neither for nor ag'in the rifles, seeing it was all quickness of
hand and eye.  I took the bird at a disadvantage, or he might have
got under, again, afore the bullet reached him.  But the Sarpent
is too wise to mind such tricks, having long been used to them.
Do you remember the time, chief, when you thought yourself sartain
of the wild-goose, and I took him out of your very eyes, as it might
be with a little smoke!  Howsever, such things pass for nothing.
atween fri'nds, and young folk will have their fun, Judith.  Ay;
here's just the bird we want, for it's as good for the fire, as it
is for the aim, and nothing should be lost that can be turned to
just account.  There, further north, Delaware."

The latter looked in the required direction, and he soon saw a
large black duck floating in stately repose on the water.  At that
distant day, when so few men were present to derange the harmony
of the wilderness, all the smaller lakes with which the interior
of New York so abounds were places of resort for the migratory
aquatic birds, and this sheet like the others had once been much
frequented by all the varieties of the duck, by the goose, the
gull, and the loon.  On the appearance of Hutter, the spot was
comparatively deserted for other sheets, more retired and remote,
though some of each species continued to resort thither, as indeed
they do to the present hour.  At that instant, a hundred birds were
visible from the castle, sleeping on the water or laying their
feathers in the limpid element, though no other offered so favorable
a mark as that Deerslayer had just pointed out to his friend.
Chingachgook, as usual, spared his words, and proceeded to execution.
This time his aim was more careful than before, and his success
in proportion.  The bird had a wing crippled, and fluttered 