oodhounds."

The shores of the lake were examined closely, in order to discover
any glimmering of light that might have been left in a camp; and the
men strained their eyes, in the obscurity, to see if some thread
of smoke was not still stealing along the mountainside, as it arose
from the dying embers of a fire.  Nothing unusual could be traced;
and as the position was at some distance from the outlet, or the
spot where the savages had been met, it was thought safe to land.
The paddles were plied again, and the bows of the canoe ground
upon the gravelly beach with a gentle motion, and a sound barely
audible.  Hutter and Hurry immediately landed, the former carrying
his own and his friend's rifle, leaving Deerslayer in charge of
the canoe.  The hollow log lay a little distance up the side of
the mountain, and the old man led the way towards it, using so much
caution as to stop at every third or fourth step, to listen if any
tread betrayed the presence of a foe.  The same death-like stillness,
however, reigned on the midnight scene, and the desired place was
reached without an occurrence to induce alarm.

"This is it," whispered Hutter, laying a foot on the trunk of a
fallen linden; "hand me the paddles first, and draw the boat out
with care, for the wretches may have left it for a bait, after
all."

"Keep my rifle handy, butt towards me, old fellow," answered March.
"If they attack me loaded, I shall want to unload the piece at 'em,
at least.  And feel if the pan is full."

"All's right," muttered the other; "move slow, when you get your
load, and let me lead the way."

The canoe was drawn out of the log with the utmost care, raised by
Hurry to his shoulder, and the two began to return to the shore,
moving but a step at a time, lest they should tumble down the
steep declivity.  The distance was not great, but the descent was
extremely difficult; and, towards the end of their little journey,
Deerslayer was obliged to land and meet them, in order to aid in
lifting the canoe through the bushes.  With his assistance the task
was successfully accomplished, and the light craft soon floated
by the side of the other canoe.  This was no sooner done, than
all three turned anxiously towards the forest and the mountain,
expecting an enemy to break out of the one, or to come rushing down
the other.  Still the silence was unbroken, and they all embarked
with the caution that had been used in coming ashore.

Hutter now steered broad off towards the centre of the lake.  Having
got a sufficient distance from the shore, he cast his prize loose,
knowing that it would drift slowly up the lake before the light
southerly air, and intending to find it on his return.  Thus relieved
of his tow, the old man held his way down the lake, steering towards
the very point where Hurry had made his fruitless attempt on the
life of the deer.  As the distance from this point to the outlet
was less than a mile, it was like entering an enemy's country; and
redoubled caution became necessary.  They reached the extremity
of the point, however, and landed in safety on the little gravelly
beach already mentioned.  Unlike the last place at which they had
gone ashore, here was no acclivity to ascend, the mountains looming
up in the darkness quite a quarter of a mile farther west, leaving
a margin of level ground between them and the strand.  The point
itself, though long, and covered with tall trees, was nearly flat,
and for some distance only a few yards in width.  Hutter and Hurry
landed as before, leaving their companion in charge of the boat.

In this instance, the dead tree that contained the canoe of which
they had come in quest lay about half-way between the extremity
of the narrow slip of land and the place where it joined the main
shore; and knowing that there was water so near him on his left,
the old man led the way along the eastern side of the belt with
some confidence walking boldly, though still with caution.  He had
landed at the point expressly to get a glimpse into the bay and
to make certain that the coast was clear; otherwise he would have
come ashore directly abreast of the hollow tree.  There was no
difficulty in finding the latter, from which the canoe was drawn
as before, and instead of carrying it down to the place where
Deerslayer lay, it was launched at the nearest favorable spot.  As
soon as it was in the water, Hurry entered it, and paddled round
to the point, whither Hutter also proceeded, following the beach.
As the three men had now in their possession all the boats on the
lake, their confidence was greatly increased, and there was no longer
the same feverish desire to quit the shore, or the same necessity
for extreme caution.  Their position on the extremity of the long,
narrow bit of land added to the feeling of security, as it permitted
an enemy to approach in only one direction, that in their front,
and under circumstances that would render discovery, with their
habitual vigilance, almost certain.  The three now landed together,
and stood grouped in consultation on the gravelly point.

"We've fairly tree'd the scamps," said Hurry, chuckling at their
success; "if they wish to visit the castle, let 'em wade or swim!
Old Tom, that idee of your'n, in burrowing out in the lake, was
high proof, and carries a fine bead.  There be men who would think
the land safer than the water; but, after all, reason shows it
isn't; the beaver, and rats, and other l'arned creatur's taking to
the last when hard pressed.  I call our position now, entrenched,
and set the Canadas at defiance."

"Let us paddle along this south shore," said Hutter, "and see if
there's no sign of an encampment; but, first, let me have a better
look into the bay, for no one has been far enough round the inner
shore of the point to make suit of that quarter yet."

As Hutter ceased speaking, all three moved in the direction he had
named.  Scarce had they fairly opened the bottom of the bay, when
a general start proved that their eyes had lighted on a common
object at the same instant.  It was no more than a dying brand,
giving out its flickering and failing light; but at that hour, and
in that place, it was at once as conspicuous as "a good deed in
a naughty world." There was not a shadow of doubt that this fire
had been kindled at an encampment of the Indians.  The situation,
sheltered from observation on all sides but one, and even on that
except for a very short distance, proved that more care had been
taken to conceal the spot than would be used for ordinary purposes,
and Hutter, who knew that a spring was near at hand, as well as
one of the best fishing-stations on the lake, immediately inferred
that this encampment contained the women and children of the party.

"That's not a warrior's encampment," he growled to Hurry; "and
there's bounty enough sleeping round that fire to make a heavy
division of head-money.  Send the lad to the canoes, for there'll
come no good of him in such an onset, and let us take the matter
in hand at once, like men."

"There's judgment in your notion, old Tom, and I like it to the
backbone.  Deerslayer, do you get into the canoe, lad, and paddle
off into the lake with the spare one, and set it adrift, as we
did with the other; after which you can float along shore, as near
as you can get to the head of the bay, keeping outside the point,
howsever, and outside the rushes, too.  You can hear us when we
want you; and if there's any delay, I'll call like a loon-yes,
that'll do it- the call of a loon shall be the signal.  If you hear
rifles, and feel like sogering, why, you may close in, and see if
you can make the same hand with the savages that you do with the
deer."

"If my wishes could be followed, this matter would not be undertaken,
Hurry-"

"Quite true-nobody denies it, boy; but your wishes can't be
followed; and that inds the matter.  So just canoe yourself off
into the middle of the lake, and by the time you get back there'll
be movements in that camp!"

The young man set about complying with great reluctance and a
heavy heart.  He knew the prejudices of the frontiermen too well,
however, to attempt a remonstrance.  The latter, indeed, under the
circumstances, might prove dangerous, as it would certainly prove
useless.  He paddled the canoe, therefore, silently and with the
former caution, to a spot near the centre of the placid sheet of
water, and set the boat just recovered adrift, to float towards the
castle, before the light southerly air.  This expedient had been
adopted, in both cases, under the certainty that the drift could
not carry the light barks more than a league or two, before the
return of light, when they might easily be overtaken in order to
prevent any wandering savage from using them, by swimming off and
getting possession, a possible but scarcely a probable event, all
the paddles were retained.

No sooner had he set the recovered canoe adrift, than Deerslayer
turned the bows of his own towards the point on the shore that had
been indicated by Hurry.  So light was the movement of the little
craft, and so steady the sweep of its master's arm, that ten minutes
had not elapsed ere it was again approaching the land, having, in
that brief time, passed over fully half a mile of distance.  As
soon as Deerslayer's eye caught a glimpse of the rushes, of which
there were many growing in the water a hundred feet from the
shore, he arrested the motion of the canoe, and anchored his boat
by holding fast to the delicate but tenacious stem of one of the
drooping plants.  Here he remained, awaiting, with an intensity of
suspense that can be easily imagined, the result of the hazardous
enterprise.

It would be difficult to convey to the minds of those who have
never witnessed it, the sublimity that characterizes the silence of
a solitude as deep as that which now reigned over the Glimmerglass.
In the present instance, this sublimity was increased by the gloom
of night, which threw its shadowy and fantastic forms around the
lake, the forest, and the hills.  It is not easy, indeed, to conceive
of any place more favorable to heighten these natural impressions,
than that Deerslayer now occupied.  The size of the lake brought
all within the reach of human senses, while it displayed so much
of the imposing scene at a single view, giving up, as it might be,
at a glance, a sufficiency to produce the deepest impressions.  As
has been said, this was the first lake Deerslayer had ever seen.
Hitherto, his experience had been limited to the courses of rivers
and smaller streams, and never before had he seen so much of
that wilderness, which he so well loved, spread before his gaze.
Accustomed to the forest, however, his mind was capable of portraying
all its hidden mysteries, as he looked upon its leafy surface.  This
was also the first time he had been on a trail where human lives
depended on the issue.  His ears had often drunk in the traditions
of frontier warfare, but he had never yet been confronted with an
enemy.

The reader will readily understand, therefore, how intense must have
been the expectation of the young man, as be sat in his solitary
canoe, endeavoring to catch the smallest sound that might denote
the course of things on shore.  His training had been perfect, so
far as theory could go, and his self-possession, notwithstanding
the high excitement, that was the fruit of novelty, would have
done credit to a veteran.  The visible evidences of the existence
of the camp, or of the fire could not be detected from the spot
where the canoe lay, and he was compelled to depend on the sense of
hearing alone.  He did not feel impatient, for the lessons he had
heard taught him the virtue of patience, and, most of all, inculcated
the necessity of wariness in conducting any covert assault on the
Indians.  Once he thought he heard the cracking of a dried twig, but
expectation was so intense it might mislead him.  In this manner
minute after minute passed, until the whole time since he left
his companions was extended to quite an hour.  Deerslayer knew not
whether to rejoice in or to mourn over this cautious delay, for,
if it augured security to his associates, it foretold destruction
to the feeble and innocent.

It might have been an hour and a half after his companions and he
had parted, when Deerslayer was aroused by a sound that filled him
equally with concern and surprise.  The quavering call of a loon
arose from the opposite side of the lake, evidently at no great
distance from its outlet.  There was no mistaking the note of
this bird, which is so familiar to all who know the sounds of the
American lakes.  Shrill, tremulous, loud, and sufficiently prolonged,
it seems the very cry of warning.  It is often raised, also, at
night, an exception to the habits of most of the other feathered
inmates of the wilderness; a circumstance which had induced Hurry
to select it as his own signal.  There had been sufficient time,
certainly, for the two adventurers to make their way by land from
the point where they had been left to that whence the call had come,
but it was not probable that they would adopt such a course.  Had
the camp been deserted they would have summoned Deerslayer to the
shore, and, did it prove to be peopled, there could be no sufficient
motive for circling it, in order to re-embark at so great a
distance.  Should he obey the signal, and be drawn away from the
landing, the lives of those who depended on him might be the forfeit-
and, should he neglect the call, on the supposition that it had been
really made, the consequences might be equally disastrous, though
from a different cause.  In this indecision he waited, trusting that
the call, whether feigned or natural, would be speedily renewed.
Nor was he mistaken.  A very few minutes elapsed before the same
shrill warning cry was repeated, and from the same part of the
lake.  This time, being on the alert, his senses were not deceived.
Although he had often heard admirable imitations of this bird, and
was no mean adept himself in raising its notes, he felt satisfied
that Hurry, to whose efforts in that way he had attended, could
never so completely and closely follow nature.  He determined,
therefore, to disregard that cry, and to wait for one less perfect
and nearer at hand.

Deerslayer had hardly come to this determination, when the profound
stillness of night and solitude was broken by a cry so startling,
as to drive all recollection of the more melancholy call of the
loon from the listener's mind.  It was a shriek of agony, that came
either from one of the female sex, or from a boy so young as not yet
to have attained a manly voice.  This appeal could not be mistaken.
Heart rending terror- if not writhing agony- was in the sounds, and
the anguish that had awakened them was as sudden as it was fearful.
The young man released his hold of the rush, and dashed his paddle
into the water; to do, he knew not what- to steer, he knew not
whither.  A very few moments, however, removed his indecision.  The
breaking of branches, the cracking of dried sticks, and the fall
of feet were distinctly audible; the sounds appearing to approach
the water though in a direction that led diagonally towards the
shore, and a little farther north than the spot that Deerslayer
had been ordered to keep near.  Following this clue, the young man
urged the canoe ahead, paying but little attention to the manner
in which he might betray its presence.  He had reached a part of
the shore, where its immediate bank was tolerably high and quite
steep.  Men were evidently threshing through the bushes and trees
on the summit of this bank, following the line of the shore, as if
those who fled sought a favorable place for descending.  Just at
this instant five or six rifles flashed, and the opposite hills
gave back, as usual, the sharp reports in prolonged rolling echoes.
One or two shrieks, like those which escape the bravest when suddenly
overcome by unexpected anguish and alarm, followed; and then the
threshing among the bushes was renewed, in a way to show that man
was grappling with man.

"Slippery devil!" shouted Hurry with the fury of disappointment-"his
skin's greased!  I sha'n't grapple!  Take that for your cunning!"

The words were followed by the fall of some heavy object among
the smaller trees that fringed the bank, appearing to Deerslayer
as if his gigantic associate had hurled an enemy from him in this
unceremonious manner.  Again the flight and pursuit were renewed,
and then the young man saw a human form break down the hill, and
rush several yards into the water.  At this critical moment the
canoe was just near enough to the spot to allow this movement,
which was accompanied by no little noise, to be seen, and feeling
that there he must take in his companion, if anywhere, Deerslayer
urged the canoe forward to the rescue.  His paddle had not been
raised twice, when the voice of Hurry was heard filling the air with
imprecations, and he rolled on the narrow beach, literally loaded
down with enemies.  While prostrate, and almost smothered with his
foes, the athletic frontierman gave his loon-call, in a manner that
would have excited laughter under circumstances less terrific.  The
figure in the water seemed suddenly to repent his own flight, and
rushed to the shore to aid his companion, but was met and immediately
overpowered by half a dozen fresh pursuers, who, just then, came
leaping down the bank.

"Let up, you painted riptyles- let up!" cried Hurry, too hard pressed
to be particular about the terms he used; "isn't it enough that I
am withed like a saw-log that ye must choke too!"

This speech satisfied Deerslayer that his friends were prisoners,
and that to land would be to share their fate He was already within
a hundred feet of the shore, when a few timely strokes of the paddle
not only arrested his advance, but forced him off to six or eight
times that distance from his enemies.  Luckily for him, all of the
Indians had dropped their rifles in the pursuit, or this retreat
might not have been effected with impunity; though no one had noted
the canoe in the first confusion of the melee.

"Keep off the land, lad," called out Hutter; "the girls depend
only on you, now; you will want all your caution to escape these
savages.  Keep off, and God prosper you, as you aid my children!"

There was little sympathy in general between Hutter and the young
man, but the bodily and mental anguish with which this appeal was
made served at the moment to conceal from the latter the former's
faults.  He saw only the father in his sufferings, and resolved
at once to give a pledge of fidelity to its interests, and to be
faithful to his word.

"Put your heart at ease, Master Hutter," he called out; "the gals
shall be looked to, as well as the castle.  The inimy has got the
shore, 'tis no use to deny, but he hasn't got the water.  Providence
has the charge of all, and no one can say what will come of it;
but, if good-will can sarve you and your'n, depend on that much.
My exper'ence is small, but my will is good."

"Ay, ay, Deerslayer," returned Hurry, in this stentorian voice,
which was losing some of its heartiness, notwithstanding,- "Ay, ay,
Deerslayer.  You mean well enough, but what can you do?  You're no
great matter in the best of times, and such a person is not likely
to turn out a miracle in the worst.  If there's one savage on this
lake shore, there's forty, and that's an army you ar'n't the man to
overcome.  The best way, in my judgment, will be to make a straight
course to the castle; get the gals into the canoe, with a few
eatables; then strike off for the corner of the lake where we came
in, and take the best trail for the Mohawk.  These devils won't
know where to look for you for some hours, and if they did, and
went off hot in the pursuit, they must turn either the foot or the
head of the lake to get at you.  That's my judgment in the matter;
and if old Tom here wishes to make his last will and testament in
a manner favorable to his darters, he'll say the same."

"'Twill never do, young man," rejoined Hutter.  "The enemy has
scouts out at this moment, looking for canoes, and you'll be seen
and taken.  Trust to the castle; and above all things, keep clear
of the land.  Hold out a week, and parties from the garrisons will
drive the savages off."

"'Twon't be four-and-twenty hours, old fellow, afore these foxes
will be rafting off to storm your castle," interrupted Hurry, with
more of the heat of argument than might be expected from a man who
was bound and a captive, and about whom nothing could be called free
but his opinions and his tongue.  "Your advice has a stout sound,
but it will have a fatal tarmination.  If you or I was in the
house, we might hold out a few days, but remember that this lad has
never seen an inimy afore tonight, and is what you yourself called
settlement-conscienced; though for my part, I think the consciences
in the settlements pretty much the same as they are out here in
the woods.  These savages are making signs, Deerslayer, for me to
encourage you to come ashore with the canoe; but that I'll never
do, as it's ag'in reason and natur'.  As for old Tom and myself,
whether they'll scalp us tonight, keep us for the torture by fire,
or carry us to Canada, is more than any one knows but the devil
that advises them how to act.  I've such a big and bushy head that
it's quite likely they'll indivor to get two scalps off it, for the
bounty is a tempting thing, or old Tom and I wouldn't be in this
scrape.  Ay- there they go with their signs ag'in, but if I advise
you to land may they eat me as well as roast me.  No, no, Deerslayer
-- do you keep off where you are, and after daylight, on no account
come within two hundred yards -"

This injunction of Hurry's was stopped by a hand being rudely
slapped against his mouth, the certain sign that some one in the
party sufficiently understood English to have at length detected
the drift of his discourse.  Immediately after, the whole group
entered the forest, Hutter and Hurry apparently making no resistance
to the movement.  Just as the sounds of the cracking bushes were
ceasing, however, the voice of the father was again heard.

"As you're true to my children, God prosper you, young man!" were
the words that reached Deerslayer's ears; after which he found
himself left to follow the dictates of his own discretion.

Several minutes elapsed, in death-like stillness, when the party
on the shore had disappeared in the woods.  Owing to the distance
-rather more than two hundred yards - and the obscurity, Deerslayer
had been able barely to distinguish the group, and to see it
retiring; but even this dim connection with human forms gave an
animation to the scene that was strongly in contrast to the absolute
solitude that remained.  Although the young man leaned forward
to listen, holding his breath and condensing every faculty in the
single sense of hearing, not another sound reached his ears to denote
the vicinity of human beings.  It seemed as if a silence that had
never been broken reigned on the spot again; and, for an instant,
even that piercing shriek, which had so lately broken the stillness
of the forest, or the execrations of March, would have been a relief
to the feeling of desertion to which it gave rise.

This paralysis of mind and body, however, could not last long in
one constituted mentally and physically like Deerslayer.  Dropping
his paddle into the water, he turned the head of the canoe, and
proceeded slowly, as one walks who thinks intently, towards the
centre of the lake.  When he believed himself to have reached a
point in a line with that where he had set the last canoe adrift,
he changed his direction northward, keeping the light air as nearly
on his back as possible.  After paddling a quarter of a mile in
this direction, a dark object became visible on the lake, a little
to the right; and turning on one side for the purpose, he had soon
secured his lost prize to his own boat.  Deerslayer now examined
the heavens, the course of the air, and the position of the two
canoes.  Finding nothing in either to induce a change of plan, he
lay down, and prepared to catch a few hours' sleep, that the morrow
might find him equal to its exigencies.

Although the hardy and the tired sleep profoundly, even in scenes
of danger, it was some time before Deerslayer lost his recollection.
His mind dwelt on what had passed, and his half-conscious faculties
kept figuring the events of the night, in a sort of waking
dream.  Suddenly he was up and alert, for he fancied he heard the
preconcerted signal of Hurry summoning him to the shore.  But all
was still as the grave again.  The canoes were slowly drifting
northward, the thoughtful stars were glimmering in their mild glory
over his head, and the forest-bound sheet of water lay embedded
between its mountains, as calm and melancholy as if never troubled
by the winds, or brightened by a noonday sun.  Once more the loon
raised his tremulous cry, near the foot of the lake, and the mystery
of the alarm was explained.  Deerslayer adjusted his hard pillow,
stretched his form in the bottom of the canoe, and slept.



Chapter VII.


    "Clear, placid Leman I Thy contrasted lake
    With the wild world I dwelt in, is a thing
    Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
    Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring. 
    This quiet sail is as a noiseless wing
    To waft me from distraction; once I loved
    Torn ocean's roar, but thy soft murmuring
    Sounds sweet as if a sister's voice reproved,
    That I with stern delights should e'er have been so moved."

    BYRON.

Day had fairly dawned before the young man, whom we have left in
the situation described in the last chapter, again opened his eyes.
This was no sooner done, than he started up, and looked about
him with the eagerness of one who suddenly felt the importance of
accurately ascertaining his precise position.  His rest had been
deep and undisturbed; and when he awoke, it was with a clearness of
intellect and a readiness of resources that were very much needed
at that particular moment.  The sun had not risen, it is true, but
the vault of heaven was rich with the winning softness that "brings
and shuts the day," while the whole air was filled with the carols
of birds, the hymns of the feathered tribe.  These sounds first told
Deerslayer the risks he ran.  The air, for wind it could scarce be
called, was still light, it is true, but it had increased a little
in the course of the night, and as the canoes were feathers on
the water, they had drifted twice the expected distance; and, what
was still more dangerous, had approached so near the base of the
mountain that here rose precipitously from the eastern shore, as
to render the carols of the birds plainly audible.  This was not
the worst.  The third canoe had taken the same direction, and was
slowly drifting towards a point where it must inevitably touch,
unless turned aside by a shift of wind, or human hands.  In other
respects, nothing presented itself to attract attention, or to
awaken alarm.  The castle stood on its shoal, nearly abreast of
the canoes, for the drift had amounted to miles in the course of
the night, and the ark lay fastened to its piles, as both had been
left so many hours before.

As a matter of course, Deerslayer's attention was first given to
the canoe ahead.  It was already quite near the point, and a very
few strokes of the paddle sufficed to tell him that it must touch
before he could possibly overtake it.  Just at this moment, too,
the wind inopportunely freshened, rendering the drift of the light
craft much more rapid than certain.  Feeling the impossibility of
preventing a contact with the land, the young man wisely determined
not to heat himself with unnecessary exertions; but first looking
to the priming of his piece, he proceeded slowly and warily towards
the point, taking care to make a little circuit, that he might be
exposed on only one side, as he approached.

The canoe adrift being directed by no such intelligence, pursued
its proper way, and grounded on a small sunken rock, at the distance
of three or four yards from the shore.  Just at that moment, Deerslayer
had got abreast of the point, and turned the bows of his own boat
to the land; first casting loose his tow, that his movements might
be unencumbered.  The canoe hung an instant to the rock; then it
rose a hair's breadth on an almost imperceptible swell of the water,
swung round, floated clear, and reached the strand.  All this the
young man noted, but it neither quickened his pulses, nor hastened
his hand.  If any one had been lying in wait for the arrival of
the waif, he must be seen, and the utmost caution in approaching
the shore became indispensable; if no one was in ambush, hurry was
unnecessary.  The point being nearly diagonally opposite to the
Indian encampment, he hoped the last, though the former was not
only possible, but probable; for the savages were prompt in adopting
all the expedients of their particular modes of warfare, and quite
likely had many scouts searching the shores for craft to carry
them off to the castle.  As a glance at the lake from any height or
projection would expose the smallest object on its surface, there
was little hope that either of the canoes would pass unseen; and
Indian sagacity needed no instruction to tell which way a boat or
a log would drift, when the direction of the wind was known.  As
Deerslayer drew nearer and nearer to the land, the stroke of his
paddle grew slower, his eye became more watchful, and his ears
and nostrils almost dilated with the effort to detect any lurking
danger.  'T was a trying moment for a novice, nor was there the
encouragement which even the timid sometimes feel, when conscious
of being observed and commended.  He was entirely alone, thrown on
his own resources, and was cheered by no friendly eye, emboldened
by no encouraging voice.  Notwithstanding all these circumstances,
the most experienced veteran in forest warfare could not have
behaved better.  Equally free from recklessness and hesitation,
his advance was marked by a sort of philosophical prudence that
appeared to render him superior to all motives but those which were
best calculated to effect his purpose.  Such was the commencement
of a career in forest exploits, that afterwards rendered this man,
in his way, and under the limits of his habits and opportunities,
as renowned as many a hero whose name has adorned the pages of
works more celebrated than legends simple as ours can ever become.

When about a hundred yards from the shore, Deerslayer rose in the
canoe, gave three or four vigorous strokes with the paddle, sufficient
of themselves to impel the bark to land, and then quickly laying
aside the instrument of labor, he seized that of war.  He was in
the very act of raising the rifle, when a sharp report was followed
by the buzz of a bullet that passed so near his body as to cause
him involuntarily to start.  The next instant Deerslayer staggered,
and fell his whole length in the bottom of the canoe.  A yell -
it came from a single voice - followed, and an Indian leaped from
the bushes upon the open area of the point, bounding towards the
canoe.  This was the moment the young man desired.  He rose on the
instant, and levelled his own rifle at his uncovered foe; but his
finger hesitated about pulling the trigger on one whom he held at
such a disadvantage.  This little delay, probably, saved the life
of the Indian, who bounded back into the cover as swiftly as he
had broken out of it.  In the meantime Deerslayer had been swiftly
approaching the land, and his own canoe reached the point just as
his enemy disappeared.  As its movements had not been directed, it
touched the shore a few yards from the other boat; and though the
rifle of his foe had to be loaded, there was not time to secure
his prize, and carry it beyond danger, before he would be exposed
to another shot.  Under the circumstances, therefore, he did not
pause an instant, but dashed into the woods and sought a cover.

On the immediate point there was a small open area, partly in
native grass, and partly beach, but a dense fringe of bushes lined
its upper side.  This narrow belt of dwarf vegetation passed, one
issued immediately into the high and gloomy vaults of the forest.
The land was tolerably level for a few hundred feet, and then it
rose precipitously in a mountainside.  The trees were tall, large,
and so free from underbrush, that they resembled vast columns,
irregularly scattered, upholding a dome of leaves.  Although they
stood tolerably close together, for their ages and size, the eye
could penetrate to considerable distances; and bodies of men, even,
might have engaged beneath their cover, with concert and intelligence.

Deerslayer knew that his adversary must be employed in reloading,
unless he had fled.  The former proved to be the case, for the young
man had no sooner placed himself behind a tree, than he caught a
glimpse of the arm of the Indian, his body being concealed by an
oak, in the very act of forcing the leathered bullet home.  Nothing
would have been easier than to spring forward, and decide the
affair by a close assault on his unprepared foe; but every feeling
of Deerslayer revolted at such a step, although his own life had
just been attempted from a cover.  He was yet unpracticed in the
ruthless expedients of savage warfare, of which he knew nothing except
by tradition and theory, and it struck him as unfair advantage to
assail an unarmed foe.  His color had heightened, his eye frowned,
his lips were compressed, and all his energies were collected and
ready; but, instead of advancing to fire, he dropped his rifle to
the usual position of a sportsman in readiness to catch his aim,
and muttered to himself, unconscious that he was speaking-

"No, no - that may be red-skin warfare, but it's not a Christian's
gifts.  Let the miscreant charge, and then we'll take it out like
men; for the canoe he must not, and shall not have.  No, no; let
him have time to load, and God will take care of the right!"

All this time the Indian had been so intent on his own movements,
that he was even ignorant that his enemy was in the woods.  His
only apprehension was, that the canoe would be recovered and carried
away before he might be in readiness to prevent it.  He had sought
the cover from habit, but was within a few feet of the fringe
of bushes, and could be at the margin of the forest in readiness
to fire in a moment.  The distance between him and his enemy was
about fifty yards, and the trees were so arranged by nature that
the line of sight was not interrupted, except by the particular
trees behind which each party stood.

His rifle was no sooner loaded, than the savage glanced around him,
and advanced incautiously as regarded the real, but stealthily as
respected the fancied position of his enemy, until he was fairly
exposed.  Then Deerslayer stepped from behind its own cover, and
hailed him.

"This a way, red-skin; this a way, if you're looking for me," he
called out.  "I'm young in war, but not so young as to stand on
an open beach to be shot down like an owl, by daylight.  It rests
on yourself whether it's peace or war atween us; for my gifts are
white gifts, and I'm not one of them that thinks it valiant to slay
human mortals, singly, in the woods."

The savage was a good deal startled by this sudden discovery of
the danger he ran.  He had a little knowledge of English, however,
and caught the drift of the other's meaning.  He was also too well
schooled to betray alarm, but, dropping the butt of his rifle to
the earth, with an air of confidence, he made a gesture of lofty
courtesy.  All this was done with the ease and self-possession
of one accustomed to consider no man his superior.  In the midst
of this consummate acting, however, the volcano that raged within
caused his eyes to glare, and his nostrils to dilate, like those
of some wild beast that is suddenly prevented from taking the fatal
leap.

"Two canoes," he said, in the deep guttural tones of his race,
holding up the number of fingers he mentioned, by way of preventing
mistakes; "one for you --one for me."

"No, no, Mingo, that will never do.  You own neither; and neither
shall you have, as long as I can prevent it.  I know it's war atween
your people and mine, but that's no reason why human mortals should
slay each other, like savage creatur's that meet in the woods; go
your way, then, and leave me to go mine.  The world is large enough
for us both; and when we meet fairly in battle, why, the Lord will
order the fate of each of us."

"Good!" exclaimed the Indian; "my brother missionary - great talk;
all about Manitou."

"Not so - not so, warrior.  I'm not good enough for the Moravians,
and am too good for most of the other vagabonds that preach about
in the woods.  No, no; I'm only a hunter, as yet, though afore the
peace is made, 'tis like enough there'll be occasion to strike a
blow at some of your people.  Still, I wish it to be done in fair
fight, and not in a quarrel about the ownership of a miserable
canoe."

"Good!  My brother very young - but he is very wise.  Little warrior
- great talker.  Chief, sometimes, in council."

"I don't know this, nor do I say it, Injin," returned Deerslayer,
coloring a little at the ill-concealed sarcasm of the other's
manner; "I look forward to a life in the woods, and I only hope
it may be a peaceable one.  All young men must go on the war-path,
when there's occasion, but war isn't needfully massacre.  I've
seen enough of the last, this very night, to know that Providence
frowns on it; and I now invite you to go your own way, while I go
mine; and hope that we may part fri'nds."

"Good!  My brother has two scalp - gray hair under 'other.  Old
wisdom - young tongue."

Here the savage advanced with confidence, his hand extended, his
face smiling, and his whole bearing denoting amity and respect.
Deerslayer met his offered friendship in a proper spirit, and they
shook hands cordially, each endeavoring to assure the other of his
sincerity and desire to be at peace.

"All have his own," said the Indian; "my canoe, mine; your canoe,
your'n.  Go look; if your'n, you keep; if mine, I keep."

"That's just, red-skin; thought you must be wrong in thinking the
canoe your property.  Howsever, seein' is believin', and we'll go
down to the shore, where you may look with your own eyes; for it's
likely you'll object to trustin' altogether to mine."

The Indian uttered his favorite exclamation of "Good!" and then
they walked side by side, towards the shore.  There was no apparent
distrust in the manner of either, the Indian moving in advance,
as if he wished to show his companion that he did not fear turning
his back to him.  As they reached the open ground, the former
pointed towards Deerslayer's boat, and said emphatically - "No mine
- pale-face canoe.  This red man's.  No want other man's canoe -
want his own."

"You're wrong, red-skin, you 're altogether wrong.  This canoe was
left in old Hutter's keeping, and is his'n according to law, red
or white, till its owner comes to claim it.  Here's the seats and
the stitching of the bark to speak for themselves.  No man ever
know'd an Injin to turn off such work."

"Good!  My brother little old - big wisdom.  Injin no make him.
White man's work."

"I'm glad you think so, for holding out to the contrary might have
made ill blood atween us, every one having a right to take possession
of his own.  I'll just shove the canoe out of reach of dispute at
once, as the quickest way of settling difficulties."

While Deerslayer was speaking, he put a foot against the end of
the light boat, and giving a vigorous shove, he sent it out into
the lake a hundred feet or more, where, taking the true current,
it would necessarily float past the point, and be in no further
danger of coming ashore.  The savage started at this ready and
decided expedient, and his companion saw that he cast a hurried
and fierce glance at his own canoe, or that which contained the
paddles.  The change of manner, however, was but momentary, and
then the Iroquois resumed his air of friendliness, and a smile of
satisfaction.

"Good!" he repeated, with stronger emphasis than ever.  "Young head,
old mind.  Know how to settle quarrel.  Farewell, brother.  He go
to house in water-muskrat house - Injin go to camp; tell chiefs no
find canoe."

Deerslayer was not sorry to hear this proposal, for he felt anxious
to join the females, and he took the offered hand of the Indian
very willingly.  The parting words were friendly, and while the red
man walked calmly towards the wood, with the rifle in the hollow of
his arm, without once looking back in uneasiness or distrust, the
white man moved towards the remaining canoe, carrying his piece in
the same pacific manner, it is true, but keeping his eye fastened
on the movements of the other.  This distrust, however, seemed to
be altogether uncalled for, and as if ashamed to have entertained
it, the young man averted his look, and stepped carelessly up to
his boat.  Here he began to push the canoe from the shore, and to
make his other preparations for departing.  He might have been thus
employed a minute, when, happening to turn his face towards the
land, his quick and certain eye told him, at a glance, the imminent
jeopardy in which his life was placed.  The black, ferocious eyes
of the savage were glancing on him, like those of the crouching
tiger, through a small opening in the bushes, and the muzzle of
his rifle seemed already to be opening in a line with his own body.

Then, indeed, the long practice of Deerslayer, as a hunter did
him good service.  Accustomed to fire with the deer on the bound,
and often when the precise position of the animal's body had in a
manner to be guessed at, he used the same expedients here.  To cock
and poise his rifle were the acts of a single moment and a single
motion: then aiming almost without sighting, he fired into the
bushes where he knew a body ought to be, in order to sustain the
appalling countenance which alone was visible.  There was not time
to raise the piece any higher, or to take a more deliberate aim.  So
rapid were his movements that both parties discharged their pieces
at the same instant, the concussions mingling in one report.  The
mountains, indeed, gave back but a single echo.  Deerslayer dropped
his piece, and stood with head erect, steady as one of the pines
in the calm of a June morning, watching the result; while the
savage gave the yell that has become historical for its appalling
influence, leaped through the bushes, and came bounding across the
open ground, flourishing a tomahawk.  Still Deerslayer moved not,
but stood with his unloaded rifle fallen against his shoulders,
while, with a hunter's habits, his hands were mechanically feeling
for the powder-horn and charger.  When about forty feet from his
enemy, the savage hurled his keen weapon; but it was with an eye
so vacant, and a hand so unsteady and feeble, that the young man
caught it by the handle as it was flying past him.  At that instant
the Indian staggered and fell his whole length on the ground.

"I know'd it - I know'd it!" exclaimed Deerslayer, who was already
preparing to force a fresh bullet into his rifle; "I know'd it must
come to this, as soon as I had got the range from the creatur's
eyes.  A man sights suddenly, and fires quick when his own life's
in danger; yes, I know'd it would come to this.  I was about the
hundredth part of a second too quick for him, or it might have
been bad for me!  The riptyle's bullet has just grazed my side -but
say what you will for or ag'in 'em, a red-skin is by no means as
sartain with powder and ball as a white man.  Their gifts don't
seem to lie that a way.  Even Chingachgook, great as he is in other
matters, isn't downright deadly with the rifle."

By this time the piece was reloaded, and Deerslayer, after tossing
the tomahawk into the canoe, advanced to his victim, and stood
over him, leaning on his rifle, in melancholy attention.  It was
the first instance in which he ha seen a man fall in battle - it
was the first fellow-creature against whom he had ever seriously
raised his own hand.  The sensations were novel; and regret, with
the freshness of our better feelings, mingled with his triumph.
The Indian was not dead, though shot directly through the body.  He
lay on his back motionless, but his eyes, now full of consciousness,
watched each action of his victor - as the fallen bird regards the
fowler - jealous of every movement.  The man probably expected the
fatal blow which was to precede the loss of his scalp; or perhaps
he anticipated that this latter act of cruelty would precede his
death.  Deerslayer read his thoughts; and he found a melancholy
satisfaction in relieving the apprehensions of the helpless savage.

"No, no, red-skin," he said; "you've nothing more to fear from me.
I am of a Christian stock, and scalping is not of my gifts.  I'll
just make sartain of your rifle, and then come back and do you
what sarvice I can.  Though here I can't stay much longer, as the
crack of three rifles will be apt to bring some of your devils down
upon me."

The close of this was said in a sort of a soliloquy, as the young
man went in quest of the fallen rifle.  The piece was found where
its owner had dropped it, and was immediately put into the canoe.
Laying his own rifle at its side, Deerslayer then returned and
stood over the Indian again.

"All inmity atween you and me's at an ind red-skin," he said; "and
you may set your heart at rest on the score of the scalp, or any
further injury.  My gifts are white, as I've told you; and I hope
my conduct will be white also."

Could looks have conveyed all they meant, it is probable Deerslayer's
innocent vanity on the subject of color would have been rebuked
a little; but he comprehended the gratitude that was expressed in
the eyes of the dying savage, without in the least detecting the
bitter sarcasm that struggled with the better feeling.

"Water!" ejaculated the thirsty and unfortunate creature; "give
poor Injin water."

"Ay, water you shall have, if you drink the lake dry.  I'll just
carry you down to it that you may take your fill.  This is the way,
they tell me, with all wounded people - water is their greatest
comfort and delight."

So saying, Deerslayer raised the Indian in his arms, and carried
him to the lake.  Here he first helped him to take an attitude in
which he could appease his burning thirst; after which he seated
himself on a stone, and took the head of his wounded adversary in
his own lap, and endeavored to soothe his anguish in the best manner
he could.

"It would be sinful in me to tell you your time hadn't come,
warrior,"  he commenced, "and therefore I'll not say it.  You've
passed the middle age already, and, considerin' the sort of lives
ye lead, your days have been pretty well filled.  The principal
thing now, is to look forward to what comes next.  Neither red-skin
nor pale-face, on the whole, calculates much on sleepin' forever;
but both expect to live in another world.  Each has his gifts, and
will be judged by 'em, and I suppose you've thought these matters
over enough not to stand in need of sarmons when the trial comes.
You'll find your happy hunting-grounds, if you've been a just Injin;
if an onjust, you'll meet your desarts in another way.  I've my
own idees about these things; but you're too old and exper'enced
to need any explanations from one as young as I."

"Good!" ejaculated the Indian, whose voice retained its depth even
as life ebbed away; "young head - old wisdom!"

"It's sometimes a consolation, when the ind comes, to know that
them we've harmed, or tried to harm, forgive us.  I suppose natur'
seeks this relief, by way of getting a pardon on 'arth; as we never
can know whether He pardons, who is all in all, till judgment itself
comes.  It's soothing to know that any pardon at such times; and
that, I conclude, is the secret.  Now, as for myself, I overlook
altogether your designs ag'in my life; first, because no harm came
of 'em; next, because it's your gifts, and natur', and trainin', and
I ought not to have trusted you at all; and, finally and chiefly,
because I can bear no ill-will to a dying man, whether heathen or
Christian.  So put your heart at ease, so far as I'm consarned; you
know best what other matters ought to trouble you, or what ought
to give you satisfaction in so trying a moment."

It is probable that the Indian had some of the fearful glimpses of
the unknown state of being which God, in mercy, seems at times to
afford to all the human race; but they were necessarily in conformity
with his habits and prejudices Like most of his people, and like
too many of our own, he thought more of dying in a way to gain
applause among those he left than to secure a better state of
existence hereafter.  While Deerslayer was speaking, his mind was
a little bewildered, though he felt that the intention was good;
and when he had done, a regret passed over his spirit that none of
his own tribe were present to witness his stoicism, under extreme
bodily suffering, and the firmness with which he met his end.
With the high innate courtesy that so often distinguishes the
Indian warrior before he becomes corrupted by too much intercourse
with the worst class of the white men, he endeavored to express
his thankfulness for the other's good intentions, and to let him
understand that they were appreciated.

"Good!" he repeated, for this was an English word much used by the
savages, "good!  young head; young heart, too.  Old heart tough;
no shed tear.  Hear Indian when he die, and no want to lie - what
he call him?"

"Deerslayer is the name I bear now, though the Delawares have said
that when I get back from this war-path, I shall have a more manly
title, provided I can 'arn one."

"That good name for boy - poor name for warrior.  He get better
quick.  No fear there," - the savage had strength sufficient, under
the strong excitement he felt, to raise a hand and tap the young
man on his breast, - "eye sartain -finger lightning - aim, death
- great warrior soon.  No Deerslayer - Hawkeye -Hawkeye - Hawkeye.
Shake hand."

Deerslayer - or Hawkeye, as the youth was then first named, for
in after years he bore the appellation throughout all that region
- Deerslayer took the hand of the savage, whose last breath was
drawn in that attitude, gazing in admiration at the countenance of
a stranger, who had shown so much readiness, skill, and firmness,
in a scene that was equally trying and novel.  When the reader
remembers it is the highest gratification an Indian can receive to
see his enemy betray weakness, he will be better able to appreciate
the conduct which had extorted so great a concession at such a
moment.

"His spirit has fled!" said Deerslayer, in a suppressed, melancholy
voice.  "Ah's me!  Well, to this we must all come, sooner or later;
and he is happiest, let his skin be what color it may, who is best
fitted to meet it.  Here lies the body of no doubt a brave warrior,
and the soul is already flying towards its heaven or hell, whether
that be a happy hunting ground, a place scant of game, regions of
glory, according to Moravian doctrine, or flames of fire!  So it
happens, too, as regards other matters!  Here have old Hutter and
Hurry Harry got themselves into difficulty, if they haven't got
themselves into torment and death, and all for a bounty that luck
offers to me in what many would think a lawful and suitable manner.
But not a farthing of such money shall cross my hand.  White I was
born, and white will I die; clinging to color to the last, even
though the King's majesty, his governors, and all his councils,
both at home and in the colonies, forget from what they come, and
where they hope to go, and all for a little advantage in warfare.
No, no, warrior, hand of mine shall never molest your scalp, and
so your soul may rest in peace on the p'int of making a decent
appearance when the body comes to join it, in your own land of
spirits."

Deerslayer arose as soon as he had spoken.  Then he placed the body
of the dead man in a sitting posture, with its back against the
little rock, taking the necessary care to prevent it from falling
or in any way 