l ordinary purposes, but the forest is ever cool, and the nights
of that elevated region of country, have always a freshness about
them, that renders clothing more necessary than is commonly the
case in the summers of a low latitude.  This had been foreseen by
Hetty, who had brought with her a coarse heavy mantle, which, when
laid over her body, answered all the useful purposes of a blanket
Thus protected, she dropped asleep in a few minutes, as tranquilly
as if watched over by the guardian care of that mother, who had so
recently been taken from her forever, affording in this particular
a most striking contrast between her own humble couch, and the
sleepless pillow of her sister.

Hour passed after hour, in a tranquility as undisturbed and a rest
as sweet as if angels, expressly commissioned for that object,
watched around the bed of Hetty Hutter.  Not once did her soft eyes
open, until the grey of the dawn came struggling through the tops
of the trees, falling on their lids, and, united to the freshness
of a summer's morning, giving the usual summons to awake.  Ordinarily,
Hetty was up ere the rays of the sun tipped the summits of the
mountains, but on this occasion her fatigue had been so great, and
her rest was so profound, that the customary warnings failed of
their effect.  The girl murmured in her sleep, threw an arm forward,
smiled as gently as an infant in its cradle, but still slumbered.
In making this unconscious gesture, her hand fell on some object that
was warm, and in the half unconscious state in which she lay, she
connected the circumstance with her habits.  At the next moment,
a rude attack was made on her side, as if a rooting animal were
thrusting its snout beneath, with a desire to force her position,
and then, uttering the name of "Judith" she awoke.  As the startled
girl arose to a sitting attitude she perceived that some dark object
sprang from her, scattering the leaves and snapping the fallen
twigs in its haste.  Opening her eyes, and recovering from the
first confusion and astonishment of her situation, Hetty perceived
a cub, of the common American brown bear, balancing itself on its
hinder legs, and still looking towards her, as if doubtful whether
it would be safe to trust itself near her person again.  The first
impulse of Hetty, who had been mistress of several of these cubs,
was to run and seize the little creature as a prize, but a loud
growl warned her of the danger of such a procedure.  Recoiling a
few steps, the girl looked hurriedly round, and perceived the dam,
watching her movements with fiery eyes at no great distance.  A
hollow tree, that once been the home of bees, having recently
fallen, the mother with two more cubs was feasting on the dainty
food that this accident had placed within her reach; while the
first kept a jealous eye on the situation of its truant and reckless
young.

It would exceed all the means of human knowledge to presume to
analyze the influences that govern the acts of the lower animals.
On this occasion, the dam, though proverbially fierce when its young
is thought to be in danger, manifested no intention to attack the
girl.  It quitted the honey, and advanced to a place within twenty
feet of her, where it raised itself on its hind legs and balanced
its body in a sort of angry, growling discontent, but approached
no nearer.  Happily, Hetty did not fly.  On the contrary, though
not without terror, she knelt with her face towards the animal,
and with clasped hands and uplifted eyes, repeated the prayer of
the previous night.  This act of devotion was not the result of
alarm, but it was a duty she never neglected to perform ere she slept,
and when the return of consciousness awoke her to the business of
the day.  As the girl arose from her knees, the bear dropped on
its feet again, and collecting its cubs around her, permitted them
to draw their natural sustenance.  Hetty was delighted with this
proof of tenderness in an animal that has but a very indifferent
reputation for the gentler feelings, and as a cub would quit its
mother to frisk and leap about in wantonness, she felt a strong
desire again to catch it up in her arms, and play with it.  But
admonished by the growl, she had self-command sufficient not to put
this dangerous project in execution, and recollecting her errand
among the hills, she tore herself away from the group, and proceeded
on her course along the margin of the lake, of which she now caught
glimpses again through the trees.  To her surprise, though not to
her alarm, the family of bears arose and followed her steps, keeping
a short distance behind her; apparently watching every movement as
if they had a near interest in all she did.

In this manner, escorted by the dam and cubs, the girl proceeded
nearly a mile, thrice the distance she had been able to achieve in
the darkness, during the same period of time.  She then reached a
brook that had dug a channel for itself into the earth, and went
brawling into the lake, between steep and high banks, covered with
trees.  Here Hetty performed her ablutions; then drinking of the
pure mountain water, she went her way, refreshed and lighter of
heart, still attended by her singular companions.  Her course now
lay along a broad and nearly level terrace, which stretched from
the top of the bank that bounded the water, to a low acclivity
that rose to a second and irregular platform above.  This was at a
part of the valley where the mountains ran obliquely, forming the
commencement of a plain that spread between the hills, southward
of the sheet of water.  Hetty knew, by this circumstance, that
she was getting near to the encampment, and had she not, the bears
would have given her warning of the vicinity of human beings.
Snuffing the air, the dam refused to follow any further, though
the girl looked back and invited her to come by childish signs, and
even by direct appeals made in her own sweet voice.  It was while
making her way slowly through some bushes, in this manner, with
averted face and eyes riveted on the immovable animals, that the
girl suddenly found her steps arrested by a human hand, that was
laid lightly on her shoulder.

"Where go?  -" said a soft female voice, speaking hurriedly, and
in concern.  -"Indian - red man savage - wicked warrior- thataway."

This unexpected salutation alarmed the girl no more than the presence
of the fierce inhabitants of the woods.  It took her a little by
surprise, it is true, but she was in a measure prepared for some
such meeting, and the creature who stopped her was as little likely
to excite terror as any who ever appeared in the guise of an Indian.
It was a girl, not much older than herself, whose smile was sunny
as Judith's in her brightest moments, whose voice was melody itself,
and whose accents and manner had all the rebuked gentleness that
characterizes the sex among a people who habitually treat their
women as the attendants and servitors of the warriors.  Beauty among
the women of the aboriginal Americans, before they have become
exposed to the hardships of wives and mothers, is by no means
uncommon.  In this particular, the original owners of the country
were not unlike their more civilized successors, nature appearing
to have bestowed that delicacy of mien and outline that forms
so great a charm in the youthful female, but of which they are so
early deprived; and that, too, as much by the habits of domestic
life as from any other cause.

The girl who had so suddenly arrested the steps of Hetty was dressed
in a calico mantle that effectually protected all the upper part of
her person, while a short petticoat of blue cloth edged with gold
lace, that fell no lower than her knees, leggings of the same, and
moccasins of deer-skin, completed her attire.  Her hair fell in
long dark braids down her shoulders and back, and was parted above
a low smooth forehead, in a way to soften the expression of eyes
that were full of archness and natural feeling.  Her face was oval,
with delicate features, the teeth were even and white, while the
mouth expressed a melancholy tenderness, as if it wore this peculiar
meaning in intuitive perception of the fate of a being who was doomed
from birth to endure a woman's sufferings, relieved by a woman's
affections.  Her voice, as has been already intimated, was soft
as the sighing of the night air, a characteristic of the females
of her race, but which was so conspicuous in herself as to have
produced for her the name of Wah-ta-Wah; which rendered into English
means Hist-oh-Hist.

In a word, this was the betrothed of Chingachgook, who - having
succeeded in lulling their suspicions, was permitted to wander around
the encampment of her captors.  This indulgence was in accordance
with the general policy of the red man, who well knew, moreover,
that her trail could have been easily followed in the event of
flight.  It will also be remembered that the Iroquois, or Hurons,
as it would be better to call them, were entirely ignorant of
the proximity of her lover, a fact, indeed, that she did not know
herself.

It is not easy to say which manifested the most self-possession
at this unexpected meeting; the pale-face, or the red girl.  But,
though a little surprised, Wah-ta-Wah was the most willing to
speak, and far the readier in foreseeing consequences, as well as
in devising means to avert them.  Her father, during her childhood,
had been much employed as a warrior by the authorities of the
Colony, and dwelling for several years near the forts, she had
caught a knowledge of the English tongue, which she spoke in the
usual, abbreviated manner of an Indian, but fluently, and without
any of the ordinary reluctance of her people.

"Where go?  -" repeated Wah-ta-Wah, returning the smile of Hetty,
in her own gentle, winning, manner - "wicked warrior that-a-way -
good warrior, far off."

"What's your name?" asked Hetty, with the simplicity of a child.

"Wah-ta-Wah.  I no Mingo - good Delaware - Yengeese friend.  Mingo
cruel, and love scalp, for blood - Delaware love him, for honor.
Come here, where no eyes."

Wah-ta-Wah now led her companion towards the lake, descending the
bank so as to place its overhanging trees and bushes between them
and any probable observers.  Nor did she stop until they were both
seated, side by side, on a fallen log, one end of which actually
lay buried in the water.

"Why you come for?" the young Indian eagerly inquired - "Where you
come for?" Hetty told her tale in her own simple and truth-loving
manner.  She explained the situation of her father, and stated her
desire to serve him, and if possible to procure his release.

"Why your father come to Mingo camp in night?" asked the Indian
girl, with a directness, which if not borrowed from the other,
partook largely of its sincerity.  "He know it war-time, and he no
boy - he no want beard - no want to be told Iroquois carry tomahawk,
and knife, and rifle.  Why he come night time, seize me by hair,
and try to scalp Delaware girl?"

"You!" said Hetty, almost sickening with horror - "Did he seize
you - did he try to scalp you?"

"Why no?  Delaware scalp sell for much as Mingo scalp.  Governor
no tell difference.  Wicked t'ing for pale-face to scalp.  No his
gifts, as the good Deerslayer always tell me."

"And do you know the Deerslayer?" said Hetty, coloring with delight
and surprise; forgetting her regrets, at the moment, in the influence
of this new feeling.  "I know him, too.  He is now in the Ark,
with Judith and a Delaware who is called the Big Serpent.  A bold
and handsome warrior is this Serpent, too!"

Spite of the rich deep colour that nature had bestowed on the
Indian beauty, the tell-tale blood deepened on her cheeks, until
the blush gave new animation and intelligence to her jet-black eyes.
Raising a finger in an attitude of warning, she dropped her voice,
already so soft and sweet, nearly to a whisper, as she continued
the discourse.

"Chingachgook!" returned the Delaware girl, sighing out the harsh
name, in sounds so softly guttural, as to cause it to reach the
ear in melody - "His father, Uncas - great chief of the Mahicanni
- next to old Tamenund!  - More as warrior, not so much gray hair,
and less at Council Fire.  You know Serpent?"

"He joined us last evening, and was in the Ark with me, for two
or three hours before I left it.  I'm afraid, Hist -" Hetty could
not pronounce the Indian name of her new friend, but having heard
Deerslayer give her this familiar appellation, she used it without
any of the ceremony of civilized life - "I'm afraid Hist, he has
come after scalps, as well as my poor father and Hurry Harry."

"Why he shouldn't - ha?  Chingachgook red warrior - very red -scalp
make his honor - Be sure he take him."

"Then," said Hetty, earnestly, "he will be as wicked as any other.
God will not pardon in a red man, what he will not pardon in a
white man.

"No true -" returned the Delaware girl, with a warmth that nearly
amounted to passion.  "No true, I tell you!  The Manitou smile
and pleased when he see young warrior come back from the war path,
with two, ten, hundred scalp on a pole!  Chingachgook father take
scalp - grandfather take scalp - all old chief take scalp, and
Chingachgook take as many scalp as he can carry, himself"

"Then, Hist, his sleep of nights must be terrible to think of.  No
one can be cruel, and hope to be forgiven."

"No cruel - plenty forgiven -" returned Wah-ta-Wah, stamping her
little foot on the stony strand, and shaking her head in a way to
show how completely feminine feeling, in one of its aspects, had
gotten the better of feminine feeling in another.  "I tell you,
Serpent brave; he go home, this time, with four, - yes - two scalp."

"And is that his errand, here?  - Did he really come all this
distance, across mountain, and valley, rivers and lakes, to torment
his fellow creatures, and do so wicked a thing?"

This question at once appeased the growing ire of the half-offended
Indian beauty.  It completely got the better of the prejudices
of education, and turned all her thoughts to a gentler and more
feminine channel.  At first, she looked around her, suspiciously,
as if distrusting eavesdroppers; then she gazed wistfully into the
face of her attentive companion; after which this exhibition of
girlish coquetry and womanly feeling, terminated by her covering
her face with both her hands, and laughing in a strain that might
well be termed the melody of the woods.  Dread of discovery, however,
soon put a stop to this naive exhibition of feeling, and removing
her hands, this creature of impulses gazed again wistfully into
the face of her companion, as if inquiring how far she might trust
a stranger with her secret.  Although Hetty had no claims to her
sister's extraordinary beauty, many thought her countenance the most
winning of the two.  It expressed all the undisguised sincerity of
her character, and it was totally free from any of the unpleasant
physical accompaniments that so frequently attend mental imbecility.
It is true that one accustomed to closer observations than common,
might have detected the proofs of her feebleness of intellect
in the language of her sometimes vacant eyes, but they were signs
that attracted sympathy by their total want of guile, rather than
by any other feeling.  The effect on Hist, to use the English and
more familiar translation of the name, was favorable, and yielding
to an impulse of tenderness, she threw her arms around Hetty, and
embraced her with an outpouring emotion, so natural that it was
only equaled by its warmth.

"You good -" whispered the young Indian - "you good, I know; it so
long since Wah-ta-Wah have a friend - a sister - any body to speak
her heart to!  You Hist friend; don't I say trut'?"

"I never had a friend," answered Hetty returning the warm embrace
with unfeigned earnestness.  "I've a sister, but no friend.  Judith
loves me, and I love Judith; but that's natural, and as we are
taught in the Bible - but I should like to have a friend!  I'll
be your friend, with all my heart, for I like your voice and your
smile, and your way of thinking in every thing, except about the
scalps -"

"No t'ink more of him - no say more of scalp -" interrupted Hist,
soothingly -"You pale-face, I red-skin; we bring up different fashion.
Deerslayer and Chingachgook great friend, and no the same colour,
Hist and - what your name, pretty pale-face?"

"I am called Hetty, though when they spell the name in the bible,
they always spell it Esther."

"What that make?  - no good, no harm.  No need to spell name at
all -Moravian try to make Wah-ta-Wah spell, but no won't let him.
No good for Delaware girl to know too much- know more than warrior
some time; that great shame.  My name Wah-ta-Wah that say Hist in
your tongue; you call him, Hist - I call him, Hetty."

These preliminaries settled to their mutual satisfaction, the two
girls began to discourse of their several hopes and projects.  Hetty
made her new friend more fully acquainted with her intentions in
behalf of her father, and, to one in the least addicted to prying
into the affairs, Hist would have betrayed her own feelings and
expectations in connection with the young warrior of her own tribe.
Enough was revealed on both sides, however, to let each party get
a tolerable insight into the views of the other, though enough
still remained in mental reservation, to give rise to the following
questions and answers, with which the interview in effect closed.
As the quickest witted, Hist was the first with her interrogatories.
Folding an arm about the waist of Hetty, she bent her head so as
to look up playfully into the face of the other, and, laughing, as
if her meaning were to be extracted from her looks, she spoke more
plainly.

"Hetty got broder, as well as fader?  -" she said - "Why no talk
of broder, as well as fader?"

"I have no brother, Hist.  I had one once, they say, but he is dead
many a year, and lies buried in the lake, by the side of my mother."

"No got broder - got a young warrior - Love him, almost as much as
fader, eh?  Very handsome, and brave-looking; fit to be chief, if
he good as he seem to be."

"It's wicked to love any man as well as I love my father, and so I
strive not to do it, Hist," returned the conscientious Hetty, who
knew not how to conceal an emotion, by an approach to an untruth
as venial as an evasion, though powerfully tempted by female shame
to err, "though I sometimes think wickedness will get the better
of me, if Hurry comes so often to the lake.  I must tell you the
truth, dear Hist, because you ask me, but I should fall down and
die in the woods, if he knew it!"

"Why he no ask you, himself?  - Brave looking - why not bold
speaking?  Young warrior ought to ask young girl, no make young
girl speak first.  Mingo girls too shame for that."

This was said indignantly, and with the generous warmth a young female
of spirit would be apt to feel, at what she deemed an invasion of
her sex's most valued privilege.  It had little influence on the
simple-minded, but also just-minded Hetty, who, though inherently
feminine in all her impulses, was much more alive to the workings
of her own heart, than to any of the usages with which convention
has protected the sensitiveness of her sex.

"Ask me what?' the startled girl demanded, with a suddenness that
proved how completely her fears had been aroused.  'Ask me, if I
like him as well as I do my own father!  Oh!  I hope he will never
put such a question to me, for I should have to answer, and that
would kill me!"

"No - no - no kill, quite - almost," returned the other, laughing
in spite of herself.  "Make blush come - make shame come too; but
he no stay great while; then feel happier than ever.  Young warrior
must tell young girl he want to make wife, else never can live in
his wigwam."

"Hurry don't want to marry me - nobody will ever want to marry me,
Hist."

"How you can know?  P'raps every body want to marry you, and
by-and-bye, tongue say what heart feel.  Why nobody want to marry
you?"

"I am not full witted, they say.  Father often tells me this; and
so does Judith, sometimes, when she is vexed; but I shouldn't so
much mind them, as I did mother.  She said so once and then she
cried as if her heart would break; and, so, I know I'm not full
witted."

Hist gazed at the gentle, simple girl, for quite a minute without
speaking, and then the truth appeared to flash all at once on the
mind of the young Indian maid.  Pity, reverence and tenderness
seemed struggling together in her breast, and then rising suddenly,
she indicated a wish to her companion that she would accompany
her to the camp, which was situated at no great distance.  This
unexpected change from the precautions that Hist had previously
manifested a desire to use, in order to prevent being seen, to an
open exposure of the person of her friend, arose from the perfect
conviction that no Indian would harm a being whom the Great Spirit
had disarmed, by depriving it of its strongest defence, reason.
In this respect, nearly all unsophisticated nations resemble each
other, appearing to offer spontaneously, by a feeling creditable to
human nature, that protection by their own forbearance, which has
been withheld by the inscrutable wisdom of Providence.  Wah-ta-Wah,
indeed, knew that in many tribes the mentally imbecile and the
mad were held in a species of religious reverence, receiving from
these untutored inhabitants of the forest respect and honors,
instead of the contumely and neglect that it is their fortune to
meet with among the more pretending and sophisticated.

Hetty accompanied her new friend without apprehension or reluctance.
It was her wish to reach the camp, and, sustained by her motives, she
felt no more concern for the consequences than did her companion
herself, now the latter was apprised of the character of the
protection that the pale-face maiden carried with her.  Still, as
they proceeded slowly along a shore that was tangled with overhanging
bushes, Hetty continued the discourse, assuming the office of
interrogating which the other had instantly dropped, as soon as
she ascertained the character of the mind to which her questions
had been addressed.

"But you are not half-witted," said Hetty, "and there's no reason
why the Serpent should not marry you."

"Hist prisoner, and Mingo got big ear.  No speak of Chingachgook
when they by.  Promise Hist that, good Hetty."

"I know - I know -" returned Hetty, half-whispering, in her eagerness
to let the other see she understood the necessity of caution.  "I
know - Deerslayer and the Serpent mean to get you away from the
Iroquois, and you wish me not to tell the secret."

"How you know?" said Hist, hastily, vexed at the moment that the
other was not even more feeble minded than was actually the case.
"How you know?  Better not talk of any but fader and Hurry - Mingo
understand dat; he no understand t'udder.  Promise you no talk
about what you no understand."

"But I do understand this, Hist, and so I must talk about it.
Deerslayer as good as told father all about it, in my presence,
and as nobody told me not to listen, I overheard it all, as I did
Hurry and father's discourse about the scalps."

"Very bad for pale-faces to talk about scalps, and very bad for
young woman to hear!  Now you love Hist, I know, Hetty, and so,
among Injins, when love hardest never talk most."

"That's not the way among white people, who talk most about them
they love best.  I suppose it's because I'm only half-witted that I
don't see the reason why it should be so different among red people."

"That what Deerslayer call gift.  One gift to talk; t'udder gift
to hold tongue.  Hold tongue your gift, among Mingos.  If Sarpent
want to see Hist, so Hetty want to see Hurry.  Good girl never tell
secret of friend."

Hetty understood this appeal, and she promised the Delaware girl
not to make any allusion to the presence of Chingachgook, or to
the motive of his visit to the lake.

"Maybe he get off Hurry and fader, as well as Hist, if let him have
his way," whispered Wah-ta-Wah to her companion, in a confiding
flattering way, just as they got near enough to the encampment to
hear the voices of several of their own sex, who were apparently
occupied in the usual toils of women of their class.  "Tink of dat,
Hetty, and put two, twenty finger on mouth.  No get friend free
without Sarpent do it."

A better expedient could not have been adopted, to secure the silence
and discretion of Hetty, than that which was now presented to her
mind.  As the liberation of her father and the young frontier man
was the great object of her adventure, she felt the connection
between it and the services of the Delaware, and with an innocent
laugh, she nodded her head, and in the same suppressed manner,
promised a due attention to the wishes of her friend.  Thus assured,
Hist tarried no longer, but immediately and openly led the way into
the encampment of her captors.



Chapter XI.


    "The great King of Kings
    Hath in the table of his law commanded,
    That thou shalt do no murder.
    Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hand,
    To hurl upon their heads that break his law."

    Richard III, I.iv.i95-97 199-200.

That the party to which Hist compulsorily belonged was not one
that was regularly on the war path, was evident by the presence of
females.  It was a small fragment of a tribe that had been hunting
and fishing within the English limits, where it was found by the
commencement of hostilities, and, after passing the winter and
spring by living on what was strictly the property of its enemies,
it chose to strike a hostile blow before it finally retired.  There
was also deep Indian sagacity in the manoeuvre which had led them
so far into the territory of their foes.  When the runner arrived
who announced the breaking out of hostilities between the English
and French - a struggle that was certain to carry with it all the
tribes that dwelt within the influence of the respective belligerents
- this particular party of the Iroquois were posted on the shores
of the Oneida, a lake that lies some fifty miles nearer to their
own frontier than that which is the scene of our tale.

To have fled in a direct line for the Canadas would have exposed them
to the dangers of a direct pursuit, and the chiefs had determined
to adopt the expedient of penetrating deeper into a region that
had now become dangerous, in the hope of being able to retire in
the rear of their pursuers, instead of having them on their trail.
The presence of the women had induced the attempt at this ruse,
the strength of these feebler members of the party being unequal
to the effort of escaping from the pursuit of warriors.  When the
reader remembers the vast extent of the American wilderness, at
that early day, he will perceive that it was possible for even a
tribe to remain months undiscovered in particular portions of it;
nor was the danger of encountering a foe, the usual precautions
being observed, as great in the woods, as it is on the high seas,
in a time of active warfare.

The encampment being temporary, it offered to the eye no more than
the rude protection of a bivouac, relieved in some slight degree
by the ingenious expedients which suggested themselves to the
readiness of those who passed their lives amid similar scenes.
One fire, that had been kindled against the roots of a living oak,
sufficed for the whole party; the weather being too mild to require
it for any purpose but cooking.  Scattered around this centre
of attraction, were some fifteen or twenty low huts, or perhaps
kennels would be a better word, into which their different owners
crept at night, and which were also intended to meet the exigencies
of a storm.

These little huts were made of the branches of trees, put together
with some ingenuity, and they were uniformly topped with bark that
had been stripped from fallen trees; of which every virgin forest
possesses hundreds, in all stages of decay.  Of furniture they had
next to none.  Cooking utensils of the simplest sort were lying near
the fire, a few articles of clothing were to be seen in or around
the huts, rifles, horns, and pouches leaned against the trees, or
were suspended from the lower branches, and the carcasses of two
or three deer were stretched to view on the same natural shambles.

As the encampment was in the midst of a dense wood, the eye could
not take in its tout ensemble at a glance, but hut after hut
started out of the gloomy picture, as one gazed about him in quest
of objects.  There was no centre, unless the fire might be so
considered, no open area where the possessors of this rude village
might congregate, but all was dark, covert and cunning, like its
owners.  A few children strayed from hut to hut, giving the spot
a little of the air of domestic life, and the suppressed laugh
and low voices of the women occasionally broke in upon the deep
stillness of the sombre forest.  As for the men, they either ate,
slept, or examined their arms.  They conversed but little, and then
usually apart, or in groups withdrawn from the females, whilst an
air of untiring, innate watchfulness and apprehension of danger
seemed to be blended even with their slumbers.

As the two girls came near the encampment, Hetty uttered a slight
exclamation, on catching a view of the person of her father.  He
was seated on the ground with his back to a tree, and Hurry stood
near him indolently whittling a twig.  Apparently they were as much
at liberty as any others in or about the camp, and one unaccustomed
to Indian usages would have mistaken them for visitors, instead
of supposing them to be captives.  Wah-ta-Wah led her new friend
quite near them, and then modestly withdrew, that her own presence
might be no restraint on her feelings.  But Hetty was not sufficiently
familiar with caresses or outward demonstrations of fondness, to
indulge in any outbreaking of feeling.  She merely approached and
stood at her father's side without speaking, resembling a silent
statue of filial affection.  The old man expressed neither alarm
nor surprise at her sudden appearance.  In these particulars he
had caught the stoicism of the Indians, well knowing that there was
no more certain mode of securing their respect than by imitating
their self-command.  Nor did the savages themselves betray the
least sign of surprise at this sudden appearance of a stranger
among them.  In a word, this arrival produced much less visible
sensation, though occurring under circumstances so peculiar, than
would be seen in a village of higher pretensions to civilization
did an ordinary traveler drive up to the door of its principal inn.

Still a few warriors collected, and it was evident by the manner
in which they glanced at Hetty as they conversed together, that she
was the subject of their discourse, and probable that the reasons
of her unlooked-for appearance were matters of discussion.  This
phlegm of manner is characteristic of the North American Indian
- some say of his white successor also - but, in this case much
should be attributed to the peculiar situation in which the party
was placed.  The force in the Ark, the presence of Chingachgook
excepted, was well known, no tribe or body of troops was believed
to be near, and vigilant eyes were posted round the entire lake,
watching day and night the slightest movement of those whom it
would not be exaggerated now to term the besieged.

Hutter was inwardly much moved by the conduct of Hetty, though he
affected so much indifference of manner.  He recollected her gentle
appeal to him before he left the Ark, and misfortune rendered
that of weight which might have been forgotten amid the triumph of
success.  Then he knew the simple, single-hearted fidelity of his
child, and understood why she had come, and the total disregard of
self that reigned in all her acts.

"This is not well, Hetty," he said, deprecating the consequences
to the girl herself more than any other evil.  "These are fierce
Iroquois, and are as little apt to forget an injury, as a favor."

"Tell me, father -" returned the girl, looking furtively about her
as if fearful of being overheard, "did God let you do the cruel
errand on which you came?  I want much to know this, that I may
speak to the Indians plainly, if he did not."

"You should not have come hither, Hetty; these brutes will not
understand your nature or your intentions!"

"How was it, father; neither you nor Hurry seems to have any thing
that looks like scalps."

"If that will set your mind at peace, child, I can answer you, no.
I had caught the young creatur' who came here with you, but her
screeches soon brought down upon me a troop of the wild cats, that
was too much for any single Christian to withstand.  If that will
do you any good, we are as innocent of having taken a scalp, this
time, as I make no doubt we shall also be innocent of receiving
the bounty."

"Thank God for that, father!  Now I can speak boldly to the Iroquois,
and with an easy conscience.  I hope Hurry, too, has not been able
to harm any of the Indians?"

"Why, as to that matter, Hetty," returned the individual in question,
"you've put it pretty much in the natyve character of the religious
truth.  Hurry has not been able, and that is the long and short of
it.  I've seen many squalls, old fellow, both on land and on the
water, but never did I feel one as lively and as snappish as that
which come down upon us, night afore last, in the shape of an Indian
hurrah-boys!  Why, Hetty, you're no great matter at a reason, or
an idee that lies a little deeper than common, but you're human
and have some human notions - now I'll just ask you to look at them
circumstances.  Here was old Tom, your father, and myself, bent on
a legal operation, as is to be seen in the words of the law and the
proclamation; thinking no harm; when we were set upon by critturs
that were more like a pack of hungry wolves than mortal savages
even, and there they had us tethered like two sheep, in less time
than it has taken me to tell you the story."

"You are free now, Hurry," returned Hetty, glancing timidly at the
fine unfettered limbs of the young giant -"You have no cords, or
withes, to pain your arms, or legs, now."

"Not I, Hetty.  Natur' is natur', and freedom is natur', too.  My
limbs have a free look, but that's pretty much the amount of it,
sin' I can't use them in the way I should like.  Even these trees
have eyes; ay, and tongues too; for was the old man, here, or I,
to start one single rod beyond our gaol limits, sarvice would be
put on the bail afore we could 'gird up our loins' for a race, and,
like as not, four or five rifle bullets would be travelling arter
us, carrying so many invitations to curb our impatience.  There
isn't a gaol in the colony as tight as this we are now in; for I've
tried the vartues of two or three on 'em, and I know the mater'als
they are made of, as well as the men that made 'em; takin' down being
the next step in schoolin', to puttin' up, in all such fabrications."

Lest the reader should get an exaggerated opinion of Hurry's
demerits from this boastful and indiscreet revelation, it may be well
to say that his offences were confined to assaults and batteries,
for several of which he had been imprisoned, when, as he has just
said, he often escaped by demonstrating the flimsiness of the
constructions in which he was confined, by opening for himself
doors in spots where the architects had neglected to place them.
But Hetty had no knowledge of gaols, and little of the nature
of crimes, beyond what her unadulterated and almost instinctive
perceptions of right and wrong taught her, and this sally of the
rude being who had spoken was lost upon her.  She understood his
general meaning, however, and answered in reference to that alone.

"It's so best, Hurry," she said.  "It is best father and you should
be quiet and peaceable, 'till I have spoken to the Iroquois, when
all will be well and happy.  I don't wish either of you to follow,
but leave me to myself.  As soon as all is settled, and you are at
liberty to go back to the castle, I will come and let you know it."

Hetty spoke with so much simple earnestness, seemed so confident of
success, and wore so high an air of moral feeling and truth, that
both the listeners felt more disposed to attach an importance to her
mediation, than might otherwise have happened.  When she manifested
an intention to quit them, therefore, they offered no obstacle,
though they saw she was about to join the group of chiefs who were
consulting apart, seemingly on the manner and motive of her own
sudden appearance.

When Hist - for so we love best to call her - quitted her companion,
she strayed near one or two of the elder warriors, who had shown
her most kindness in her captivity, the principal man of whom had
even offered to adopt her as his child if she would consent to
become a Huron.  In taking this direction, the shrewd girl did so
to invite inquiry.  She was too well trained in the habits of her
people to obtrude the opinions of one of her sex and years on men
and warriors, but nature had furnished a tact and ingenuity that
enabled her to attract the attention she desired, without wounding
the pride of those to whom it was her duty to defer and respect.
Even her affected indifference stimulated curiosity, and Hetty had
hardly reached the side of her father, before the Delaware girl
was brought within the circle of the warriors, by a secret but
significant gesture.  Here she was questioned as to the person of
her companion, and the motives that had brought her to the camp.
This was all that Hist desired.  She explained the manner in which
she had detected the weakness of Hetty's reason, rather exaggerating
than lessening the deficiency in her intellect, and then she
related in general terms the object of the girl in venturing among
her enemies.  The effect was all that the speaker expected, her
account investing the person and character of their visitor with a
sacredness and respect that she well knew would prove her protection.
As soon as her own purpose was attained, Hist withdrew to a distance,
where, with female consideration and a sisterly tenderness she set
about the preparation of a meal, to be offered to her new friend
as soon as the latter might be at liberty to partake of it.  While
thus occupied, however, the ready girl in no degree relaxed in her
watchfulness, noting every change of countenance among the chiefs,
every movement of Hetty's, and the smallest occurrence that could
be likely to affect her own interests, or that of her new friend.

As Hetty approached the chiefs they opened their little circle,
with an ease and deference of manner that would have done credit
to men of more courtly origin.  A fallen tree lay near, and the
oldest of the warriors made a quiet sign for the girl to be seated
on it, taking his place at her side with the gentleness of a father.
The others arranged themselves around the two with grave dignity,
and then the girl, who had sufficient observation to perceive that
such a course was expected of her, began to reveal the object of
her visit.  The moment she opened her mouth to speak, however, the
old chief gave a gentle sign for her to forbear, said a few words
to one of his juniors, and then waited in silent patience until the
latter had summoned Hist to the party.  This interruption proceeded
from the chief's having discovered that there existed a necessity
for an interpreter, few of the Hurons present understanding the
English language, and they but imperfectly.

Wah-ta-Wah was not sorry to be called upon to be present at the
interview, and least of all in the character in which she was now
wanted.  She was aware of the hazards she ran in attempting to
deceive one or two of the party, but was none the less resolved to
use every means that offered, and to practice every artifice that
an Indian education could supply, to conceal the facts of the
vicinity of her betrothed, and of the errand on which he had come.
One unpracticed in the expedients and opinions of savage life
would not have suspected the readiness of invention, the wariness
of action, the high resolution, the noble impulses, the deep
self-devotion, and the feminine disregard of self when the affections
were concerned, that lay concealed beneath the demure looks, the
mild eyes, and the sunny smiles of this young Indian beauty.  As she
approached them, the grim old warriors regarded her with pleasure,
for they had a secret pride in the hope of engrafting so rare a
scion on the stock of their own nation; adoption being as regularly
practised, and as distinctly recognized among the tribes of America,
as it ever had been among those nations that submit to the sway of
the Civil Law.

As soon as Hist was seated by the side of Hetty, the old chief
desired her to ask "the fair young pale-face" what had brought her
among the Iroquois, and what they could do to serve her.

"Tell them, Hist, who I am - Thomas Hutter's youngest daughter;
Thomas Hutter, the oldest of their two prisoners; he who owns the
castle and the Ark, and who has the best right to be thought the
owner of these hills, and that lake, since he has dwelt so long,
and trapped so long, and fished so long, among them - They'll know
whom you mean by Thomas Hutter, if you tell them, that.  And then
tell them that I've come here to convince them they ought not to
harm father and Hurry, but let them go in peace, and to treat them
as brethren rather than as enemies.  Now tell them all this plainly,
Hist, and fear nothing for yourself or me.  God will protect us."

Wah-ta-Wah did as the other desired, taking care to render the words
of her friend as literally as possible into the Iroquois tongue, a
language she used with a readiness almost equal to that with which
she spoke her own.  The chiefs heard this opening explanation
with grave decorum, the two who had a little knowledge of English
intimating their satisfaction with the interpreter by furtive but
significant glances of the eyes.

"And, now, Hist," continued Hetty, as soon as it was intimated to
her that she might proceed, "and, now, Hist, I wish you to tell
these red men, word for word, what I am about to say.  Tell them
first, that father and Hurry came here with an intention to take as
many scalps as they could, for the wicked governor and the province
have offered money for scalps, whether of warriors, or women, men
or children, and the love of gold was too strong for their hearts
to withstand it.  Tell them this, dear Hist, just as you have heard
it from me, word for word."

Wah-ta-Wah hesitated about rendering this speech as literally
as had been desired, but detecting the intelligence of those who
understood English, and apprehending even a greater knowledge than
they actually possessed she found herself compelled to comply.
Contrary to what a civilized man would have expected, the admission
of the motives and of the errands of their prisoners produced no
visible effect on either the countenances or the feelings of the
listeners.  They probably considered the act meritorious, and that
which neither of them would have hesitated to perform in his own
person, he would not be apt to censure in another.

"And, now, Hist," resumed Hetty, as soon as she perceived that her
first speeches were understood by the chiefs, "you can tell them
more.  They know that father and Hurry did not succeed, and therefore
they can bear them no grudge for any harm that has been done.  If
they had slain their children and wives it would not alter the
matter, and I'm not certain that what I am about to tell them would
not have more weight had there been mischief done.  But ask them
first, Hist, if they know there is a God, who reigns over the whole
earth, and is ruler and chief of all who live, let them be red, or
white, or what color they may?"

Wah-ta-Wah looked a little surprised at this question, for the
idea of the Great Spirit is seldom long absent from the mind of
an Indian girl.  She put the question as literally as possible,
however, and received a grave answer in the affirmative.

"This is right," continued Hetty, "and my duty will now be light.
This Great Spirit, as you call our God, has caused a book to
be written, that we call a Bible, and in this book have been set
down all his commandments, and his holy will and pleasure, and the
rules by which all men are to live, and directions how to govern
the thoughts even, and the wishes, and the will.  Here, this is one
of these holy books, and you must tell the chiefs what I am about
to read to them from its sacred pages."

As Hetty concluded, she reverently unrolled a small English Bible
from its envelope of coarse calico, treating the volume with the
sort of external respect that a Romanist would be apt to show to
a religious relic.  As she slowly proceeded in her task the grim
warriors watched each movement with riveted eyes, and when they saw
the little volume appear a slight expression of surprise escaped
one or two of them.  But Hetty held it out towards them in triumph,
as if she expected the sight would produce a visible miracle, and
then, without betraying either surprise or mortification at the
Stoicism of the Indian, she turned eagerly to her new friend, in
order to renew the discourse.

"This is the sacred volume, Hist," she said - "and these words,
and lines, and verses, and chapters, all came from God."

"Why Great Spirit no send book to Injin, too?" demanded Hist, with
the directness of a mind that was totally unsophisticated.

"Why?" answered Hetty, a little bewildered by a question so
unexpected.  "Why?  - Ah!  you know the Indians don't know how to
read."

If Hist was not satisfied with this explanation, she did not deem
the point of sufficient importance to be pressed.  Simply bending
her body, in a gentle admission of the truth of what she heard,
she sat patiently awaiting the further arguments of the pale-face
enthusiast.

"You can tell these chiefs that throughout this book, men are ordered
to forgive their enemies; to treat them as they would brethren; and
never to injure their fellow creatures, more especially on account
of revenge or any evil passions.  Do you think you can tell them
this, so that they will understand it, Hist?"

"Tell him well enough, but he no very easy to understand." Hist
then conveyed the ideas of Hetty, in the best manner she could, to
the attentive Indians, who heard her words with some such surprise as
an American of our own times would be apt to betray at a suggestion
that the great modern but vacillating ruler of things human, public
opinion, might be wrong.  One or two of their number, however,
having met with missionaries, said a few words in explanation, and
then the group gave all its attention to the communications that
were to follow.  Before Hetty resumed she inquired earnestly of
Hist if the chiefs had understood her, and receiving an evasive
answer, was fain to be satisfied.

"I will now read to the warriors some of the verses that it is
good for them to know," continued the girl, whose manner grew more
solemn and earnest as she proceeded - "and they will remember that
they are the very words of the Great Spirit.  First, then, ye are
commanded to 'love thy neighbor as Thyself.' Tell them that, dear
Hist."

"Neighbor, for Injin, no mean pale-face," answered the Delaware
girl, with more decision than she had hitherto thought it necessary
to use.  "Neighbor mean Iroquois for Iroquois, Mohican for Mohican,
Pale-face for pale face.  No need tell chief any thing else."

"You forget, Hist, these are the words of the Great Spirit,
and the chiefs must obey them as well as others.  Here is another
commandment -'Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn
to him the other also.'"

"What that mean?" demanded Hist, with the quickness of lightning.

Hetty explained that it was an order not to resent injuries, but
rather to submit to receive fresh wrongs from the offender.

"And hear this, too, Hist," she added.  "'Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despitefully use you and persecute you.'"

By this time Hetty had become excited; her eye gleamed with the
earnestness of her feelings, her cheeks flushed, and her voice,
usually so low and modulated, became stronger and more impressive.
With the Bible she had been early made familiar by her mother, and
she now turned from passage to passage with surprising rapidity,
taking care to cull such verses as taught the sublime lessons of
Christian charity and Christian forgiveness.  To translate half
she said, in her pious earnestness, Wah-ta-Wah would have found
impracticable, had she made the effort, but wonder held her tongue
tied, equally with the chiefs, and the young, simple-minded enthusiast
had fairly become exhausted with her own efforts, before the other
opened her mouth, again, to utter a syllable.  Then, indeed, the
Delaware girl gave a brief translation of the substance of what had
been both read and said, confining herself to one or two of the more
striking of the verses, those that had struck her own imagination
as the most paradoxical, and which certainly would have been the
most applicable to the case, could the uninstructed minds of the
listeners embrace the great moral truths they conveyed.

It will be scarcely necessary to tell the reader the effect that
such novel duties would be likely to produce among a group of Indian
warriors, with whom it was a species of religious principle never
to forget a benefit, or to forgive an injury.  Fortunately, the
previous explanations of Hist had prepared the minds of the Hurons
for something extravagant, and most of that which to them seemed
inconsistent and paradoxical, was accounted for by the fact that
the speaker possessed a mind that was constituted differently from
those of most of the human race.  Still there were one or two old
men who had heard similar doctrines from the missionaries, and these
felt a desire to occupy an idle moment by pursuing a subject that
they found so curious.

"This is the Good Book of the pale-faces," observed one of these
chiefs, taking the volume from the unresisting hands of Hetty, who
gazed anxiously at his face while he turned the leaves, as if she
expected to witness some visible results from the circumstance.
"This is the law by which my white brethren professes to live?"

Hist, to whom this question was addressed, if it might be considered
as addressed to any one, in particular, answered simply in the
affirmative; adding that both the French of the Canadas, and the
Yengeese of the British provinces equally admitted its authority,
and affected to revere its principles.

"Tell my young sister," said the Huron, looking directly at Hist,
"that I will open my mouth and say a few words."

"The Iroquois chief go to speak - my pale-face friend listen," said
Hist.

"I rejoice to hear it!" exclaimed Hetty.  "God has touched his
heart, and he will now let father and Hurry go."

"This is the pale-face law," resumed the chief.  "It tells him to
do good to them that hurt him, and when his brother asks him for
his rifle to give him the powder horn, too.  Such is the pale-face
law?"

"Not so - not so -" answered Hetty earnestly, when these words had
been interpreted - "There is not a word about rifles in the whole
book, and powder and bullets give offence to the Great Spirit."

"Why then does the pale-face use them?  If he is ordered to give
double to him that asks only for one thing, why does he take double
from the poor Indian who ask for no thing.  He comes from beyond
the rising sun, with this book in his hand, and he teaches the red
man to read it, but why does he forget himself all it says?  When
the Indian gives, he is never satisfied; and now he offers gold
for the scalps of our women and children, though he calls us beasts
if we take the scalp of a warrior killed in open war.  My name is
Rivenoak."

When Hetty had got this formidable question fairly presented to
her mind in the translation, and Hist did her duty with more than
usual readiness on this occasion, it scarcely need be said that
she was sorely perplexed.  Abler heads than that of this poor girl
have frequently been puzzled by questions of a similar drift, and
it is not surprising that with all her o