f his comrade, and had no
difficulty in understanding the allusion, the intercourse between
the conqueror and his victim on that occasion having been seen by
several savages on the shore of the lake, who had been stationed
at different points just within the margin of bushes to watch the
drifting canoes, and who had not time to reach the scene of action,
ere the victor had retired.  The effect on this rude being of the
forest was an exclamation of surprise; then such a smile of courtesy,
and wave of the hand, succeeded, as would have done credit to Asiatic
diplomacy.  The two Iroquois spoke to each other in low tones, and
both drew near the end of the raft that was closest to the platform.

"My brother, Hawkeye, has sent a message to the Hurons," resumed
Rivenoak, "and it has made their hearts very glad.  They hear he has
images of beasts with two tails!  Will he show them to his friends?"

"Inimies would be truer," returned Deerslayer, "but sound isn't
sense, and does little harm.  Here is One of the images; I toss it
to you under faith of treaties.  If it's not returned, the rifle
will settle the p'int atween us."

The Iroquois seemed to acquiesce in the conditions, and Deerslayer
arose and prepared to toss one of the elephants to the raft, both
parties using all the precaution that was necessary to prevent its
loss.  As practice renders men expert in such things, the little
piece of ivory was soon successfully transferred from one hand to
the other, and then followed another scene on the raft, in which
astonishment and delight got the mastery of Indian stoicism.
These two grim old warriors manifested even more feeling, as they
examined the curiously wrought chessman, than had been betrayed
by the boy; for, in the case of the latter, recent schooling had
interposed its influence; while the men, like all who are sustained
by well established characters, were not ashamed to let some of
their emotions be discovered.  For a few minutes they apparently
lost the consciousness of their situation, in the intense scrutiny
they bestowed on a material so fine, work so highly wrought, and
an animal so extraordinary.  The lip of the moose is, perhaps, the
nearest approach to the trunk of the elephant that is to be found
in the American forest, but this resemblance was far from being
sufficiently striking to bring the new creature within the range
of their habits and ideas, and the more they studied the image,
the greater was their astonishment.  Nor did these children of
the forest mistake the structure on the back of the elephant for a
part of the animal.  They were familiar with horses and oxen, and
had seen towers in the Canadas, and found nothing surprising in
creatures of burthen.  Still, by a very natural association, they
supposed the carving meant to represent that the animal they saw was
of a strength sufficient to carry a fort on its back; a circumstance
that in no degree lessened their wonder.

"Has my pale-face brother any more such beasts?" at last the senior
of the Iroquois asked, in a sort of petitioning manner.

"There's more where them came from, Mingo," was the answer; "one
is enough, howsever, to buy off fifty scalps."

"One of my prisoners is a great warrior - tall as a pine - strong
as the moose -active as a deer - fierce as the panther!  Some day
he'll be a great chief, and lead the army of King George!"

"Tut-tut Mingo; Hurry Harry is Hurry Harry, and you'll never make
more than a corporal of him, if you do that.  He's tall enough, of
a sartainty; but that's of no use, as he only hits his head ag'in
the branches as he goes through the forest.  He's strong too, but
a strong body isn't a strong head, and the king's generals are
not chosen for their sinews; he's swift, if you will, but a rifle
bullet is swifter; and as for f'erceness, it's no great ricommend
to a soldier; they that think they feel the stoutest often givin'
out at the pinch.  No, no, you'll niver make Hurry's scalp pass for
more than a good head of curly hair, and a rattle pate beneath it!"

"My old prisoner very wise - king of the lake - great warrior, wise
counsellor!"

"Well, there's them that might gainsay all this, too, Mingo.  A
very wise man wouldn't be apt to be taken in so foolish a manner as
befell Master Hutter, and if he gives good counsel, he must have
listened to very bad in that affair.  There's only one king of
this lake, and he's a long way off, and isn't likely ever to see
it.  Floating Tom is some such king of this region, as the wolf
that prowls through the woods is king of the forest.  A beast with
two tails is well worth two such scalps!"

"But my brother has another beast?  - He will give two" - holding
up as many fingers, "for old father?"

"Floating Tom is no father of mine, but he'll fare none the worse
for that.  As for giving two beasts for his scalp, and each beast
with two tails, it is quite beyond reason.  Think yourself well
off, Mingo, if you make a much worse trade."

By this time the self-command of Rivenoak had got the better of his
wonder, and he began to fall back on his usual habits of cunning,
in order to drive the best bargain he could.  It would be useless
to relate more than the substance of the desultory dialogue that
followed, in which the Indian manifested no little management,
in endeavoring to recover the ground lost under the influence of
surprise.  He even affected to doubt whether any original for the
image of the beast existed, and asserted that the oldest Indian
had never heard a tradition of any such animal.  Little did either
of them imagine at the time that long ere a century elapsed, the
progress of civilization would bring even much more extraordinary
and rare animals into that region, as curiosities to be gazed
at by the curious, and that the particular beast, about which the
disputants contended, would be seen laving its sides and swimming
in the very sheet of water, on which they had met.

[The Otsego is a favorite place for the caravan keepers to let
their elephants bathe.  The writer has seen two at a time, since
the publication of this book, swimming about in company.]

As is not uncommon on such occasions, one of the parties got
a little warm in the course of the discussion, for Deerslayer met
all the arguments and prevarication of his subtle opponent with his
own cool directness of manner, and unmoved love of truth.  What an
elephant was he knew little better than the savage, but he perfectly
understood that the carved pieces of ivory must have some such
value in the eyes of an Iroquois as a bag of gold or a package of
beaver skins would in those of a trader.  Under the circumstances,
therefore, he felt it to be prudent not to concede too much at first,
since there existed a nearly unconquerable obstacle to making the
transfers, even after the contracting parties had actually agreed
upon the terms.  Keeping this difficulty in view, he held the extra
chessmen in reserve, as a means of smoothing any difficulty in the
moment of need.

At length the savage pretended that further negotiation was useless,
since he could not be so unjust to his tribe as to part with the
honor and emoluments of two excellent, full grown male scalps for
a consideration so trifling as a toy like that he had seen, and he
prepared to take his departure.  Both parties now felt as men are
wont to feel, when a bargain that each is anxious to conclude is on
the eve of being broken off, in consequence of too much pertinacity
in the way of management.  The effect of the disappointment was
very different, however, on the respective individuals.  Deerslayer
was mortified, and filled with regret, for he not only felt for
the prisoners, but he also felt deeply for the two girls.  The
conclusion of the treaty, therefore, left him melancholy and full
of regret.  With the savage, his defeat produced the desire of
revenge.  In a moment of excitement, he had loudly announced his
intention to say no more, and he felt equally enraged with himself
and with his cool opponent, that he had permitted a pale face to
manifest more indifference and self-command than an Indian chief.
When he began to urge his raft away from the platform his countenance
lowered and his eye glowed, even while he affected a smile of
amity and a gesture of courtesy at parting.

It took some little time to overcome the inertia of the logs, and
while this was being done by the silent Indian, Rivenoak stalked
over the hemlock boughs that lay between the logs in sullen ferocity,
eyeing keenly the while the hut, the platform and the person of his
late disputant.  Once he spoke in low, quick tones to his companion,
and he stirred the boughs with his feet like an animal that is
restive.  At that moment the watchfulness of Deerslayer had a little
abated, for he sat musing on the means of renewing the negotiation
without giving too much advantage to the other side.  It was perhaps
fortunate for him that the keen and bright eyes of Judith were as
vigilant as ever.  At the instant when the young man was least on
his guard, and his enemy was the most on the alert, she called out
in a warning voice to the former, most opportunely giving the alarm.

"Be on your guard, Deerslayer," the girl cried - "I see rifles with
the glass, beneath the hemlock brush, and the Iroquois is loosening
them with his feet!"

It would seem that the enemy had carried their artifices so far as
to Employ an agent who understood English.  The previous dialogue
had taken place in his own language, but it was evident by the sudden
manner in which his feet ceased their treacherous occupation, and
in which the countenance of Rivenoak changed from sullen ferocity
to a smile of courtesy, that the call of the girl was understood.
Signing to his companion to cease his efforts to set the logs in
motion, he advanced to the end of the raft which was nearest to
the platform, and spoke.

"Why should Rivenoak and his brother leave any cloud between them,"
he said.  "They are both wise, both brave, and both generous; they
ought to part friends.  One beast shall be the price of one prisoner."

"And, Mingo," answered the other, delighted to renew the negotiations
on almost any terms, and determined to clinch the bargain if possible
by a little extra liberality, "you'll see that a pale-face knows
how to pay a full price, when he trades with an open heart, and an
open hand.  Keep the beast that you had forgotten to give back to
me, as you was about to start, and which I forgot to ask for, on
account of consarn at parting in anger.  Show it to your chiefs.
When you bring us our fri'nds, two more shall be added to it,
and," hesitating a moment in distrust of the expediency of so great
a concession; then, deciding in its favor - "and, if we see them
afore the sun sets, we may find a fourth to make up an even number."

This settled the matter.  Every gleam of discontent vanished from
the dark countenance of the Iroquois, and he smiled as graciously,
if not as sweetly, as Judith Hutter, herself.  The piece already in
his possession was again examined, and an ejaculation of pleasure
showed how much he was pleased with this unexpected termination of
the affair.  In point of fact, both he and Deerslayer had momentarily
forgotten what had become of the subject of their discussion, in
the warmth of their feelings, but such had not been the case with
Rivenoak's companion.  This man retained the piece, and had fully
made up his mind, were it claimed under such circumstances as to
render its return necessary, to drop it in the lake, trusting to
his being able to find it again at some future day.  This desperate
expedient, however, was no longer necessary, and after repeating
the terms of agreement, and professing to understand them, the two
Indians finally took their departure, moving slowly towards the
shore.

"Can any faith be put in such wretches?" asked Judith, when she and
Hetty had come out on the platform, and were standing at the side
of Deerslayer, watching the dull movement of the logs.  "Will they
not rather keep the toy they have, and send us off some bloody proofs
of their getting the better of us in cunning, by way of boasting?
I've heard of acts as bad as this."

"No doubt, Judith; no manner of doubt, if it wasn't for Indian
natur'.  But I'm no judge of a red-skin, if that two tail'd beast
doesn't set the whole tribe in some such stir as a stick raises in
a beehive!  Now, there's the Sarpent; a man with narves like flint,
and no more cur'osity in every day consarns than is befitting
prudence; why he was so overcome with the sight of the creatur',
carved as it is in bone, that I felt ashamed for him!  That's just
their gifts, howsever, and one can't well quarrel with a man for
his gifts, when they are lawful.  Chingachgook will soon get over
his weakness and remember that he's a chief, and that he comes of
a great stock, and has a renowned name to support and uphold; but
as for yonder scamps, there'll be no peace among 'em until they
think they've got possession of every thing of the natur' of that
bit of carved bone that's to be found among Thomas Hutter's stores!"

"They only know of the elephants, and can have no hopes about the
other things."

"That's true, Judith; still, covetousness is a craving feelin'!
They'll say, if the pale-faces have these cur'ous beasts with two
tails, who knows but they've got some with three, or for that matter
with four!  That's what the schoolmasters call nat'ral arithmetic,
and 'twill be sartain to beset the feelin's of savages.  They'll
never be easy, till the truth is known."

"Do you think, Deerslayer," inquired Hetty, in her simple and
innocent manner, "that the Iroquois won't let father and Hurry go?
I read to them several of the very best verses in the whole Bible,
and you see what they have done, already."

The hunter, as he always did, listened kindly and even affectionately
to Hetty's remarks; then he mused a moment in silence.  There was
something like a flush on his cheek as he answered, after quite a
minute had passed.

"I don't know whether a white man ought to be ashamed, or not, to
own he can't read, but such is my case, Judith.  You are skilful,
I find, in all such matters, while I have only studied the hand of
God as it is seen in the hills and the valleys, the mountain-tops,
the streams, the forests and the springs.  Much l'arning may be got
in this way, as well as out of books; and, yet, I sometimes think
it is a white man's gift to read!  When I hear from the mouths of
the Moravians the words of which Hetty speaks, they raise a longing
in my mind, and I then think I will know how to read 'em myself;
but the game in summer, and the traditions, and lessons in war,
and other matters, have always kept me behind hand."

"Shall I teach you, Deerslayer?" asked Hetty, earnestly.  "I'm
weak-minded, they say, but I can read as well as Judith.  It might
save your life to know how to read the Bible to the savages, and
it will certainly save your soul; for mother told me that, again
and again!"

"Thankee, Hetty - yes, thankee, with all my heart.  These are like
to be too stirring times for much idleness, but after it's peace,
and I come to see you ag'in on this lake, then I'll give myself
up to it, as if 'twas pleasure and profit in a single business.
Perhaps I ought to be ashamed, Judith, that 'tis so; but truth is
truth.  As for these Iroquois, 'tisn't very likely they'll forget
a beast with two tails, on account of a varse or two from the Bible.
I rather expect they'll give up the prisoners, and trust to some
sarcumvenion or other to get 'em back ag'in, with us and all in the
castle and the Ark in the bargain.  Howsever, we must humour the
vagabonds, first to get your father and Hurry out of their hands,
and next to keep the peace atween us, until such time as the Sarpent
there can make out to get off his betrothed wife.  If there's any
sudden outbreakin' of anger and ferocity, the Indians will send
off all their women and children to the camp at once, whereas, by
keeping 'em calm and trustful we may manage to meet Hist at the
spot she has mentioned.  Rather than have the bargain fall through,
now, I'd throw in half a dozen of them effigy bow-and-arrow men,
such as we've in plenty in the chist."

Judith cheerfully assented, for she would have resigned even the
flowered brocade, rather than not redeem her father and please
Deerslayer.  The prospects of success were now so encouraging as to
raise the spirits of all in the castle, though a due watchfulness
of the movements of the enemy was maintained.  Hour passed after
hour, notwithstanding, and the sun had once more begun to fall
towards the summits of the western hills, and yet no signs were
seen of the return of the raft.  By dint of sweeping the shore with
the glass, Deerslayer at length discovered a place in the dense
and dark woods where, he entertained no doubt, the Iroquois were
assembled in considerable numbers.  It was near the thicket whence
the raft had issued, and a little rill that trickled into the
lake announced the vicinity of a spring.  Here, then, the savages
were probably holding their consultation, and the decision was to
be made that went to settle the question of life or death for the
prisoners.  There was one ground for hope in spite of the delay,
however, that Deerslayer did not fail to place before his anxious
companions.  It was far more probable that the Indians had left their
prisoners in the camp, than that they had encumbered themselves by
causing them to follow through the woods a party that was out on
a merely temporary excursion.  If such was the fact, it required
considerable time to send a messenger the necessary distance, and
to bring the two white men to the spot where they were to embark.
Encouraged by these reflections, a new stock of patience was
gathered, and the declension of the sun was viewed with less alarm.

The result justified Deerslayer's conjecture.  Not long before the
sun had finally disappeared, the two logs were seen coming out of
the thicket, again, and as it drew near, Judith announced that her
father and Hurry, both of them pinioned, lay on the bushes in the
centre.  As before, the two Indians were rowing.  The latter seemed
to be conscious that the lateness of the hour demanded unusual
exertions, and contrary to the habits of their people, who are
ever averse to toil, they labored hard at the rude substitutes for
oars.  In consequence of this diligence, the raft occupied its old
station in about half the time that had been taken in the previous
visits.

Even after the conditions were so well understood, and matters had
proceeded so far, the actual transfer of the prisoners was not a
duty to be executed without difficulty.  The Iroquois were compelled
to place great reliance on the good faith of their foes, though it
was reluctantly given; and was yielded to necessity rather than to
confidence.  As soon as Hutter and Hurry should be released, the
party in the castle numbered two to one, as opposed to those on the
raft, and escape by flight was out of the question, as the former
had three bark canoes, to say nothing of the defences of the house
and the Ark.  All this was understood by both parties, and it is
probable the arrangement never could have been completed, had not
the honest countenance and manner of Deerslayer wrought their usual
effect on Rivenoak.

"My brother knows I put faith in him," said the latter, as he
advanced with Hutter, whose legs had been released to enable the
old man to ascend to the platform.  "One scalp - one more beast."

"Stop, Mingo," interrupted the hunter, "keep your prisoner a moment.
I have to go and seek the means of payment."

This excuse, however, though true in part, was principally a fetch.
Deerslayer left the platform, and entering the house, he directed
Judith to collect all the arms and to conceal them in her own room.
He then spoke earnestly to the Delaware, who stood on guard as
before, near the entrance of the building, put the three remaining
castles in his pocket, and returned.

"You are welcome back to your old abode, Master Hutter," said
Deerslayer, as he helped the other up on the platform, slyly passing
into the hand of Rivenoak, at the same time, another of the castles.
"You'll find your darters right glad to see you, and here's Hetty
come herself to say as much in her own behalf."

Here the hunter stopped speaking and broke out into a hearty fit of
his silent and peculiar laughter.  Hurry's legs were just released,
and he had been placed on his feet.  So tightly had the ligatures
been drawn, that the use of his limbs was not immediately recovered,
and the young giant presented, in good sooth, a very helpless
and a somewhat ludicrous picture.  It was this unusual spectacle,
particularly the bewildered countenance, that excited the merriment
of Deerslayer.

"You look like a girdled pine in a clearin', Hurry Harry, that
is rocking in a gale," said Deerslayer, checking his unseasonable
mirth, more from delicacy to the others than from any respect to
the liberated captive.  "I'm glad, howsever, to see that you haven't
had your hair dressed by any of the Iroquois barbers, in your late
visit to their camp."

"Harkee, Deerslayer," returned the other a little fiercely, "it
will be prudent for you to deal less in mirth and more in friendship
on this occasion.  Act like a Christian, for once, and not like a
laughing gal in a country school when the master's back is turned,
and just tell me whether there's any feet, or not, at the end of
these legs of mine.  I think I can see them, but as for feelin'
they might as well be down on the banks of the Mohawk, as be where
they seem to be."

"You've come off whole, Hurry, and that's not a little," answered
the other, secretly passing to the Indian the remainder of the
stipulated ransom, and making an earnest sign at the same moment
for him to commence his retreat.  "You've come off whole, feet and
all, and are only a little numb from a tight fit of the withes.
Natur'll soon set the blood in motion, and then you may begin to
dance, to celebrate what I call a most wonderful and onexpected
deliverance from a den of wolves."

Deerslayer released the arms of his friends, as each landed, and the
two were now stamping and limping about on the platform, growling
and uttering denunciations as they endeavored to help the returning
circulation.  They had been tethered too long, however, to regain
the use of their limbs in a moment, and the Indians being quite as
diligent on their return as on their advance, the raft was fully
a hundred yards from the castle when Hurry, turning accidentally
in that direction, discovered how fast it was getting beyond the
reach of his vengeance.  By this time he could move with tolerable
facility, though still numb and awkward.  Without considering his
own situation, however, he seized the rifle that leaned against
the shoulder of Deerslayer, and attempted to cock and present it.
The young hunter was too quick for him.  Seizing the piece he
wrenched it from the hands of the giant, not, however, until it
had gone off in the struggle, when pointed directly upward.  It is
probable that Deerslayer could have prevailed in such a contest,
on account of the condition of Hurry's limbs, but the instant the
gun went off, the latter yielded, and stumped towards the house,
raising his legs at each step quite a foot from the ground, from
an uncertainty of the actual position of his feet.  But he had been
anticipated by Judith.  The whole stock of Hutter's arms, which had
been left in the building as a resource in the event of a sudden
outbreaking of hostilities, had been removed, and were already
secreted, agreeably to Deerslayer's directions.  In consequence
of this precaution, no means offered by which March could put his
designs in execution.

Disappointed in his vengeance, Hurry seated himself, and like
Hutter, for half an hour, he was too much occupied in endeavoring
to restore the circulation, and in regaining the use of his limbs,
to indulge in any other reflections.  By the end of this time the
raft had disappeared, and night was beginning to throw her shadows once
more over the whole sylvan scene.  Before darkness had completely
set in, and while the girls were preparing the evening meal,
Deerslayer related to Hutter an outline of events that had taken
place, and gave him a history of the means he had adopted for the
security of his children and property.



Chapter XV.


    "As long as Edwarde rules thys lande,
    Ne quiet you wylle ye know;
    Your sonnes and husbandes shall be slayne,
    And brookes with bloode shall 'flowe.'

    'You leave youre geode and lawfulle kynge,
    Whenne ynne adversity;
    Like me, untoe the true cause stycke,
    And for the true cause dye."

    Chatterton.

The calm of evening was again in singular contrast, while its
gathering gloom was in as singular unison with the passions of men.
The sun was set, and the rays of the retiring luminary had ceased
to gild the edges of the few clouds that had sufficient openings
to admit the passage of its fading light.  The canopy overhead
was heavy and dense, promising another night of darkness, but the
surface of the lake was scarcely disturbed by a ripple.  There was
a little air, though it scarce deserved to be termed wind.  Still,
being damp and heavy, it had a certain force.  The party in the
castle were as gloomy and silent as the scene.  The two ransomed
prisoners felt humbled and discoloured, but their humility partook
of the rancour of revenge.  They were far more disposed to remember
the indignity with which they had been treated during the last few
hours of their captivity, than to feel grateful for the previous
indulgence.  Then that keen-sighted monitor, conscience, by reminding
them of the retributive justice of all they had endured, goaded
them rather to turn the tables on their enemies than to accuse
themselves.  As for the others, they were thoughtful equally from
regret and joy.  Deerslayer and Judith felt most of the former
sensation, though from very different causes, while Hetty for the
moment was perfectly happy.  The Delaware had also lively pictures
of felicity in the prospect of so soon regaining his betrothed.
Under such circumstances, and in this mood, all were taking the
evening meal.

"Old Tom!" cried Hurry, bursting into a fit of boisterous laughter,
"you look'd amazin'ly like a tethered bear, as you was stretched
on them hemlock boughs, and I only wonder you didn't growl more.
Well, it's over, and syth's and lamentations won't mend the matter!
There's the blackguard Rivenoak, he that brought us off has an
oncommon scalp, and I'd give as much for it myself as the Colony.
Yes, I feel as rich as the governor in these matters now, and will
lay down with them doubloon for doubloon.  Judith, darling, did
you mourn for me much, when I was in the hands of the Philipsteins?"

The last were a family of German descent on the Mohawk, to whom
Hurry had a great antipathy, and whom he had confounded with the
enemies of Judea.

"Our tears have raised the lake, Hurry March, as you might have
seen by the shore!" returned Judith, with a feigned levity that
she was far from feeling.  "That Hetty and I should have grieved
for father was to be expected; but we fairly rained tears for you."

"We were sorry for poor Hurry, as well as for father, Judith!" put
in her innocent and unconscious sister.

"True, girl, true; but we feel sorrow for everybody that's in
trouble, you know," returned the other in a quick, admonitory manner
and a low tone.  "Nevertheless, we are glad to see you, Master
March, and out of the hands of the Philipsteins, too."

"Yes, they're a bad set, and so is the other brood of 'em, down on
the river.  It's a wonderment to me how you got us off, Deerslayer;
and I forgive you the interference that prevented my doin' justice
on that vagabond, for this small service.  Let us into the secret,
that we may do you the same good turn, at need.  Was it by lying,
or by coaxing?"

"By neither, Hurry, but by buying.  We paid a ransom for you both,
and that, too, at a price so high you had well be on your guard
ag'in another captyvement, lest our stock of goods shouldn't hold
out."

"A ransom!  Old Tom has paid the fiddler, then, for nothing of
mine would have bought off the hair, much less the skin.  I didn't
think men as keen set as them vagabonds would let a fellow up so
easy, when they had him fairly at a close hug, and floored.  But
money is money, and somehow it's unnat'ral hard to withstand.
Indian or white man, 'tis pretty much the same.  It must be owned,
Judith, there's a considerable of human natur' in mankind ginirally,
arter all!"

Hutter now rose, and signing to Deerslayer, he led him to an inner
room, where, in answer to his questions, he first learned the price
that had been paid for his release.  The old man expressed neither
resentment nor surprise at the inroad that had been made on his
chest, though he did manifest some curiosity to know how far the
investigation of its contents had been carried.  He also inquired
where the key had been found.  The habitual frankness of Deerslayer
prevented any prevarication, and the conference soon terminated by
the return of the two to the outer room, or that which served for
the double purpose of parlour and kitchen.

"I wonder if it's peace or war, between us and the savages!"
exclaimed Hurry, just as Deerslayer, who had paused for a single
instant, listened attentively, and was passing through the outer
door without stopping. "This givin' up captives has a friendly
look, and when men have traded together on a fair and honourable
footing they ought to part fri'nds, for that occasion at least.  Come
back, Deerslayer, and let us have your judgment, for I'm beginnin'
to think more of you, since your late behaviour, than I used to
do."

"There's an answer to your question, Hurry, since you're in such
haste to come ag'in to blows."

As Deerslayer spoke, he threw on the table on which the other was
reclining with one elbow a sort of miniature fagot, composed of a
dozen sticks bound tightly together with a deer-skin thong.  March
seized it eagerly, and holding it close to a blazing knot of pine
that lay on the hearth, and which gave out all the light there was
in the room, ascertained that the ends of the several sticks had
been dipped in blood.

"If this isn't plain English," said the reckless frontier man,
"it's plain Indian!  Here's what they call a dicliration of war,
down at York, Judith.  How did you come by this defiance, Deerslayer?"

"Fairly enough.  It lay not a minut' since, in what you call Floatin'
Tom's door-yard."

"How came it there?"

"It never fell from the clouds, Judith, as little toads sometimes
do, and then it don't rain."

"You must prove where it come from, Deerslayer, or we shall suspect
some design to skear them that would have lost their wits long ago,
if fear could drive 'em away."

Deerslayer had approached a window, and cast a glance out of it on
the dark aspect of the lake.  As if satisfied with what he beheld,
he drew near Hurry, and took the bundle of sticks into his own
hand, examining it attentively.

"Yes, this is an Indian declaration of war, sure enough," he said,
"and it's a proof how little you're suited to be on the path it
has travelled, Harry March, that it has got here, and you never
the wiser as to the means.  The savages may have left the scalp on
your head, but they must have taken Off the ears; else you'd have
heard the stirring of the water made by the lad as he come off
ag'in on his two logs.  His ar'n'd was to throw these sticks at
our door, as much as to say, we've struck the war-post since the
trade, and the next thing will be to strike you."

"The prowling wolves!  But hand me that rifle, Judith, and I'll
send an answer back to the vagabonds through their messenger."

"Not while I stand by, Master March," coolly put in Deerslayer,
motioning for the other to forbear.  "Faith is faith, whether given
to a red-skin, or to a Christian.  The lad lighted a knot, and came
off fairly under its blaze to give us this warning; and no man
here should harm him, while empl'yed on such an ar'n'd.  There's no
use in words, for the boy is too cunning to leave the knot burning,
now his business is done, and the night is already too dark for a
rifle to have any sartainty."

"That may be true enough, as to a gun, but there's virtue still in
a canoe," answered Hurry, passing towards the door with enormous
strides, carrying a rifle in his hands.  "The being doesn't live
that shall stop me from following and bringing back that riptyle's
scalp.  The more on 'em that you crush in the egg, the fewer there'll
be to dart at you in the woods!"

Judith trembled like the aspen, she scarce knew why herself, though
there was the prospect of a scene of violence; for if Hurry was
fierce and overbearing in the consciousness of his vast strength,
Deerslayer had about him the calm determination that promises
greater perseverance, and a resolution more likely to effect its
object.  It was the stern, resolute eye of the latter, rather than
the noisy vehemence of the first, that excited her apprehensions.
Hurry soon reached the spot where the canoe was fastened, but
not before Deerslayer had spoken in a quick, earnest voice to the
Serpent, in Delaware.  The latter had been the first, in truth, to
hear the sounds of the oars, and he had gone upon the platform in
jealous watchfulness.  The light Satisfied him that a message was
coming, and when the boy cast his bundle of sticks at his feet, it
neither moved his anger nor induced surprise.  He merely stood at
watch, rifle in hand, to make certain that no treachery lay behind
the defiance.  As Deerslayer now called to him, he stepped into the
canoe, and quick as thought removed the paddles.  Hurry was furious
when he found that he was deprived of the means of proceeding.  He
first approached the Indian with loud menaces, and even Deerslayer
stood aghast at the probable consequences.  March shook his
sledge-hammer fists and flourished his arms as he drew near the
Indian, and all expected he would attempt to fell the Delaware
to the earth; one of them, at least, was well aware that such
an experiment would be followed by immediate bloodshed.  But even
Hurry was awed by the stern composure of the chief, and he, too,
knew that such a man was not to be outraged with impunity; he
therefore turned to vent his rage on Deerslayer, where he foresaw
no consequences so terrible.  What might have been the result of
this second demonstration if completed, is unknown, since it was
never made.

"Hurry," said a gentle, soothing voice at his elbow, "it's wicked
to be so angry, and God will not overlook it.  The Iroquois treated
you well, and they didn't take your scalp, though you and father
wanted to take theirs."

The influence of mildness on passion is well known.  Hetty, too,
had earned a sort of consideration, that had never before been
enjoyed by her, through the self-devotion and decision of her recent
conduct.  Perhaps her established mental imbecility, by removing
all distrust of a wish to control, aided her influence.  Let the
cause be as questionable as it might, the effect we sufficiently
certain.  Instead of throttling his old fellow-traveler, Hurry
turned to the girl and poured out a portion of his discontent, if
none of his anger, in her attentive ears.

"Tis too bad, Hetty!"  he exclaimed; "as bad as a county gaol or
a lack of beaver, to get a creatur' into your very trap, then to
see it get off.  As much as six first quality skins, in valie, has
paddled off on them clumsy logs, when twenty strokes of a well-turned
paddle would overtake 'em.  I say in valie, for as to the boy in
the way of natur', he is only a boy, and is worth neither more nor
less than one.  Deerslayer, you've been ontrue to your fri'nds in
letting such a chance slip through my fingers well as your own."

The answer was given quietly, but with a voice as steady as a
fearless nature and the consciousness of rectitude could make it.
"I should have been untrue to the right, had I done otherwise,"
returned the Deerslayer, steadily; "and neither you, nor any other
man has authority to demand that much of me.  The lad came on
a lawful business, and the meanest red-skin that roams the woods
would be ashamed of not respecting his ar'n'd.  But he's now far
beyond your reach, Master March, and there's little use in talking,
like a couple of women, of what can no longer be helped."

So saying, Deerslayer turned away, like one resolved to waste no more
words on the subject, while Hutter pulled Harry by the sleeve, and
led him into the ark.  There they sat long in private conference.
In the mean time, the Indian and his friend had their secret
consultation; for, though it wanted some three or four hours to the
rising of the star, the former could not abstain from canvassing
his scheme, and from opening his heart to the other.  Judith,
too, yielded to her softer feelings, and listened to the whole of
Hetty's artless narrative of what occurred after she landed.  The
woods had few terrors for either of these girls, educated as they
had been, and accustomed as they were to look out daily at their
rich expanse or to wander beneath their dark shades; but the elder
sister felt that she would have hesitated about thus venturing
alone into an Iroquois camp.  Concerning Hist, Hetty was not very
communicative.  She spoke of her kindness and gentleness and of the
meeting in the forest; but the secret of Chingachgook was guarded
with a shrewdness and fidelity that many a sharper-witted girl
might have failed to display.

At length the several conferences were broken up by the reappearance
of Hutter on the platform.  Here he assembled the whole party, and
communicated as much of his intentions as he deemed expedient.  Of
the arrangement made by Deerslayer, to abandon the castle during
the night and to take refuge in the ark, he entirely approved.
It struck him as it had the others, as the only effectual means
of escaping destruction.  Now that the savages had turned their
attention to the construction of rafts, no doubt could exist of
their at least making an attempt to carry the building, and the
message of the bloody sticks sufficiently showed their confidence
in their own success.  In short, the old man viewed the night as
critical, and he called on all to get ready as soon as possible, in
order to abandon the dwellings temporarily at least, if not forever.

These communications made, everything proceeded promptly and with
intelligence; the castle was secured in the manner already described,
the canoes were withdrawn from the dock and fastened to the ark by
the side of the other; the few necessaries that had been left in
the house were transferred to the cabin, the fire was extinguished
and all embarked.

The vicinity of the hills, with their drapery of pines, had the
effect to render nights that were obscure darker than common on the
lake.  As usual, however, a belt of comparative light was etched
through the centre of the sheet, while it was within the shadows
of the mountains that the gloom rested most heavily on the water.
The island, or castle, stood in this belt of comparative light, but
still the night was so dark as to cover the aperture of the ark.
At the distance of an observer on the shore her movements could not
be seen at all, more particularly as a background of dark hillside
filled up the perspective of every view that was taken diagonally
or directly across the water.  The prevailing wind on the lakes
of that region is west, but owing to the avenues formed by the
mountains it is frequently impossible to tell the true direction of
the currents, as they often vary within short distances and brief
differences of time.  This is truer in light fluctuating puffs of
air than in steady breezes; though the squalls of even the latter
are familiarly known to be uncertain and baffling in all mountainous
regions and narrow waters.  On the present occasion, Hutter himself
(as he shoved the ark from her berth at the side of the platform)
was at a loss to pronounce which way the wind blew.  In common,
this difficulty was solved by the clouds, which, floating high
above the hill tops, as a matter of course obeyed the currents; but
now the whole vault of heaven seemed a mass of gloomy wall.  Not
an opening of any sort was visible, and Chingachgook we already
trembling lest the non-appearance of the star might prevent his
betrothed from being punctual to her appointment.  Under these
circumstances, Hutter hoisted his sail, seemingly with the sole
intention of getting away from the castle, as it might be dangerous
to remain much longer in its vicinity.  The air soon filled the
cloth, and when the scow was got under command, and the sail was
properly trimmed, it was found that the direction was southerly,
inclining towards the eastern shore.  No better course offering
for the purposes of the party, the singular craft was suffered to
skim the surface of the water in this direction for more than hour,
when a change in the currents of the air drove them over towards
the camp.

Deerslayer watched all the movements of Hutter and Harry with
jealous attention.  At first, he did not know whether to ascribe
the course they held to accident or to design; but he now began to
suspect the latter.  Familiar as Hutter was with the lake, it was
easy to deceive one who had little practice on the water; and let
his intentions be what they might, it was evident, ere two hours
had elapsed, that the ark had got sufficient space to be within a
hundred rods of the shore, directly abreast of the known position
of the camp.  For a considerable time previously to reaching this
point, Hurry, who had some knowledge of the Algonquin language,
had been in close conference with the Indian, and the result was
now announced by the latter to Deerslayer, who had been a cold,
not to say distrusted, looker-on of all that passed.

"My old father, and my young brother, the Big Pine," - for so
the Delaware had named March - "want to see Huron scalps at their
belts," said Chingachgook to his friend.  "There is room for some
on the girdle of the Sarpent, and his people will look for them when
he goes back to his village.  Their eyes must not be left long in
a fog, but they must see what they look for.  I know that my brother
has a white hand; he will not strike even the dead.  He will wait
for us; when we come back, he will not hide his face from shame
for his friend.  The great Serpent of the Mohicans must be worthy
to go on the war-path with Hawkeye."

"Ay, ay, Sarpent, I see how it is; that name's to stick, and in
time I shall get to be known by it instead of Deerslayer; well, if
such honours will come, the humblest of us all must be willing to
abide by 'em.  As for your looking for scalps, it belongs to your
gifts, and I see no harm in it.  Be marciful, Sarpent, howsever;
be marciful, I beseech of you.  It surely can do no harm to a
red-skin's honour to show a little marcy.  As for the old man, the
father of two young women, who might ripen better feelin's in his
heart, and Harry March, here, who, pine as he is, might better bear
the fruit of a more Christianized tree, as for them two, I leave
them in the hands of the white man's God.  Wasn't it for the bloody
sticks, no man should go ag'in the Mingos this night, seein' that
it would dishonor our faith and characters; but them that crave
blood can't complain if blood is shed at their call.  Still, Sarpent,
you can be marciful.  Don't begin your career with the wails of
women and the cries of children.  Bear yourself so that Hist will
smile, and not weep, when she meets you.  Go, then; and the Manitou
presarve you!"

"My brother will stay here with the scow.  Wah will soon be standing
on the shore waiting, and Chingachgook must hasten."

The Indian then joined his two co-adventurers, and first lowering
the sail, they all three entered the canoe, and left the side of
the ark.  Neither Hutter nor March spoke to Deerslayer concerning
their object, or the probable length of their absence.  All this
had been confided to the Indian, who had acquitted himself of the
trust with characteristic brevity.  As soon as the canoe was out of
sight, and that occurred ere the paddles had given a dozen strokes,
Deerslayer made the best dispositions he could to keep the ark as
nearly stationary as possible; and then he sat down in the end of
the scow, to chew the cud of his own bitter reflections.  It was
not long, however, before he was joined by Judith, who sought every
occasion to be near him, managing her attack on his affections
with the address that was suggested by native coquetry, aided by
no little practice, but which received much of its most dangerous
power from the touch of feeling that threw around her manner, voice,
accents, thoughts, and acts, the indescribable witchery of natural
tenderness.  Leaving the young hunter exposed to these dangerous
assailants, it has become our more immediate business to follow
the party in the canoe to the shore.

The controlling influence that led Hutter and Hurry to repeat their
experiment against the camp was precisely that which had induced
the first attempt, a little heightened, perhaps, by the desire
of revenge.  But neither of these two rude beings, so ruthless in
all things that touched the rights and interests of the red man,
thought possessing veins of human feeling on other matters, was much
actuated by any other desire than a heartless longing for profit.
Hurry had felt angered at his sufferings, when first liberated, it
is true, but that emotion soon disappeared in the habitual love
of gold, which he sought with the reckless avidity of a needy
spendthrift, rather than with the ceaseless longings of a miser.
In short, the motive that urged them both so soon to go against
the Hurons, was an habitual contempt of their enemy, acting on
the unceasing cupidity of prodigality.  The additional chances of
success, however, had their place in the formation of the second
enterprise.  It was known that a large portion of the warriors
-perhaps all - were encamped for the night abreast of the castle,
and it was hoped that the scalps of helpless victims would be
the consequence.  To confess the truth, Hutter in particular - he
who had just left two daughters behind him - expected to find few
besides women and children in the camp.  The fact had been but
slightly alluded to in his communications with Hurry, and with
Chingachgook it had been kept entirely out of view.  If the Indian
thought of it at all, it was known only to himself.

Hutter steered the canoe; Hurry had manfully taken his post in the
bows, and Chingachgook stood in the centre.  We say stood, for all
three were so skilled in the management of that species of frail
bark, as to be able to keep erect positions in the midst of the
darkness.  The approach to the shore was made with great caution,
and the landing effected in safety.  The three now prepared their
arms, and began their tiger-like approach upon the camp.  The Indian
was on the lead, his two companions treading in his footsteps with
a stealthy cautiousness of manner that rendered their progress almost
literally noiseless.  Occasionally a dried twig snapped under the
heavy weight of the gigantic Hurry, or the blundering clumsiness
of the old man; but, had the Indian walked on air, his step could
not have seemed lighter.  The great object was first to discover
the position of the fire, which was known to be the centre of the
whole encampment.  At length the keen eye of Chingachgook caught a
glimpse of this important guide.  It was glimmering at a distance
among the trunks of trees.  There was no blaze, but merely a single
smouldering brand, as suited the hour; the savages usually retiring
and rising with the revolutions of the sun.

As soon as a view was obtained of this beacon, the progress of the
adventurers became swifter and more certain.  In a few minutes they
got to the edge of the circle of little huts.  Here they stopped to
survey their ground, and to concert their movements.  The darkness
was so deep as to render it difficult to distinguish anything but
the glowing brand, the trunks of the nearest trees, and the endless
canopy of leaves that veiled the clouded heaven.  It was ascertained,
however, that a hut was quite near, and Chingachgook attempted to
reconnnoitre its interior.  The manner in which the Indian approached
the place that was supposed to contain enemies, resembled the wily
advances of the cat on the bird.  As he drew near, he stooped to
his hands and knees, for the entrance was so low as to require this
attitude, even as a convenience.  Before trusting his head inside,
however, he listened long to catch the breathing of sleepers.  No
sound was audible, and this human Serpent thrust his head in at
the door, or opening, as another serpent would have peered in on
the nest.  Nothing rewarded the hazardous experiment; for, after
feeling cautiously with a hand, the place was found to be empty.

The Delaware proceeded in the same guarded manner to one or two more
of the huts, finding all in the same situation.  He then returned
to his companions, and informed them that the Hurons had deserted
their camp.  A little further inquiry corroborated this fact, and
it only remained to return to the canoe.  The different manner
in which the adventurers bore the disappointment is worthy of a
passing remark.  The chief, who had landed solely with the hope of
acquiring renown, stood stationary, leaning against a tree, waiting
the pleasure of his companions.  He was mortified, and a little
surprised, it is true; but he bore all with dignity, falling back
for support on the sweeter expectations that still lay in reserve
for that evening.  It was true, he could not now hope to meet his
mistress with the proofs of his daring and skill on his person, but
he might still hope to meet her; and the warrior, who was zealous
in the search, might always hope to be honored.  On the other hand,
Hutter and Hurry, who had been chiefly instigated by the basest of
all human motives, the thirst of gain, could scarce control their
feelings.  They went prowling among the huts, as if they expected
to find some forgotten child or careless sleeper; and again and
again did they vent their spite on the insensible huts, several of
which were actually torn to pieces, and scattered about the place.
Nay, they even quarrelled with each other, and fierce reproaches
passed between them.  It is possible some serious consequences might
have occurred, had not the Delaware interfered to remind them of
the danger of being so unguarded, and of the necessity of returning
to the ark.  This checked the dispute, and in a few minutes they
were paddling sullenly back to the spot where they hoped to find
that vessel.

It has been said that Judith took her place at the side of Deerslayer,
soon after the adventurers departed.  For a short time the girl
was silent, and the hunter was ignorant which of the sisters had
approached him, but he soon recognized the rich, full-spirited
voice of the elder, as her feelings escaped in words.

"This is a terrible life for women, Deerslayer!" she exclaimed.
"Would to Heaven I could see an end of it!"

"The life is well enough, Judith," was the answer, "being pretty
much as it is used or abused.  What would you wish to see in its
place?"

"I should be a thousand times happier to live nearer to civilized
beings - where there are farms and churches, and houses built as
it might be by Christian hands; and where my sleep at night would
be sweet and tranquil!  A dwelling near on of the forts would be
far better than this dreary place where we live!"

"Nay, Judith, I can't agree too lightly in the truth of all this.
If forts are good to keep off inimies, they sometimes hold inimies
of their own.  I don't think 'twould be for your good, or the good
of Hetty, to live near one; and if I must say what I think, I'm
afeard you are a little too near as it is."  Deerslayer went on,
in his own steady, earnest manner, for the darkness concealed the
tints that colored the cheeks of the girl almost to the brightness
of crimson, while her own great efforts suppressed the sounds of
th