n than it is among the pale-faces.  This is a p'int on
which Christians may well boast, if boasting can be set down for
Christianity in any manner or form, which I rather think it cannot.
Howsever, all women have their trials.  Red women have their'n
in what I should call the nat'ral way, while white women take 'em
innoculated like.  Bear your burthen, Hist, becomingly, and remember
if it be a little toilsome, how much lighter it is than that of
most Indian women.  I know the Sarpent well - what I call cordially
- and he will never be a tyrant to any thing he loves, though he
will expect to be treated himself like a Mohican Chief.  There will
be cloudy days in your lodge I suppose, for they happen under all
usages, and among all people, but, by keepin' the windows of the
heart open there will always be room for the sunshine to enter.
You come of a great stock yourself, and so does Chingachgook.  It's
not very likely that either will ever forget the sarcumstance and
do any thing to disgrace your forefathers.  Nevertheless, likin'
is a tender plant, and never thrives long when watered with tears.
Let the 'arth around your married happiness be moistened by the
dews of kindness."

"My pale brother is very wise; Wah will keep in her mind all that
his wisdom tells her."

"That's judicious and womanly, Hist.  Care in listening, and
stout-heartedness in holding to good counsel, is a wife's great
protection.  And, now, ask the Sarpent to come and speak with me,
for a moment, and carry away with you all my best wishes and prayers.
I shall think of you, Hist, and of your intended husband, let what
may come to pass, and always wish you well, here and hereafter,
whether the last is to be according to Indian idees, or Christian
doctrines."

Hist shed no tear at parting.  She was sustained by the high
resolution of one who had decided on her course, but her dark eyes
were luminous with the feelings that glowed within, and her pretty
countenance beamed with an expression of determination that was in
marked and singular contrast to its ordinary gentleness.  It was
but a minute ere the Delaware advanced to the side of his friend
with the light, noiseless tread of an Indian.

"Come this-a-way, Sarpent, here more out of sight of the women,"
commenced the Deerslayer, "for I've several things to say that
mustn't so much as be suspected, much less overheard.  You know
too well the natur' of furloughs and Mingos to have any doubts or
misgivin's consarnin' what is like to happen, when I get back to
the camp.  On them two p'ints therefore, a few words will go a great
way.  In the first place, chief, I wish to say a little about Hist,
and the manner in which you red men treat your wives.  I suppose
it's accordin' to the gifts of your people that the women should
work, and the men hunt; but there's such a thing as moderation in
all matters.  As for huntin', I see no good reason why any limits
need be set to that, but Hist comes of too good a stock to toil
like a common drudge.  One of your means and standin' need never
want for corn, or potatoes, or anything that the fields yield;
therefore, I hope the hoe will never be put into the hands of any
wife of yourn.  You know I am not quite a beggar, and all I own,
whether in ammunition, skins, arms, or calicoes, I give to Hist,
should I not come back to claim them by the end of the season.  This
will set the maiden up, and will buy labor for her, for a long time
to come.  I suppose I needn't tell you to love the young woman, for
that you do already, and whomsoever the man ra'ally loves, he'll
be likely enough to cherish.  Nevertheless, it can do no harm to
say that kind words never rankle, while bitter words do.  I know
you're a man, Sarpent, that is less apt to talk in his own lodge,
than to speak at the Council Fire; but forgetful moments may
overtake us all, and the practyse of kind doin', and kind talkin',
is a wonderful advantage in keepin' peace in a cabin, as well as
on a hunt."

"My ears are open," returned the Delaware gravely; "the words of
my brother have entered so far that they never can fall out again.
They are like rings, that have no end, and cannot drop.  Let him
speak on; the song of the wren and the voice of a friend never
tire."

"I will speak a little longer, chief, but you will excuse it for
the sake of old companionship, should I now talk about myself.
If the worst comes to the worst, it's not likely there'll be much
left of me but ashes, so a grave would be useless, and a sort of
vanity.  On that score I'm no way partic'lar, though it might be
well enough to take a look at the remains of the pile, and should
any bones, or pieces be found, 'twould be more decent to gather
them together, and bury them, than to let them lie for the wolves
to gnaw at, and howl over.  These matters can make no great difference
in the mind, but men of white blood and Christian feelin's have
rather a gift for graves."

"It shall be done as my brother says," returned the Indian, gravely.
"If his mind is full, let him empty it in the bosom of a friend."

"I thank you, Sarpent; my mind's easy enough; yes, it's tolerable
easy.  Idees will come uppermost that I'm not apt to think about
in common, it's true, but by striving ag'in some, and lettin' other
some out, all will come right in the long run.  There's one thing,
howsever, chief, that does seem to me to be onreasonable, and
ag'in natur', though the missionaries say it's true, and bein' of
my religion and colour I feel bound to believe them.  They say an
Injin may torment and tortur' the body to his heart's content, and
scalp, and cut, and tear, and burn, and consume all his inventions
and deviltries, until nothin' is left but ashes, and they shall
be scattered to the four winds of heaven, yet when the trumpet of
God shall sound, all will come together ag'in, and the man will
stand forth in his flesh, the same creatur' as to looks, if not as
to feelin's, that he was afore he was harmed!"

"The missionaries are good men - mean well," returned the Delaware
courteously; "they are not great medicines.  They think all they
say, Deerslayer; that is no reason why warriors and orators should
be all ears.  When Chingachgook shall see the father of Tamenund
standing in his scalp, and paint, and war lock, then will he believe
the missionaries."

"Seein' is believin', of a sartainty; ahs!  me - and some of us
may see these things sooner than we thought.  I comprehind your
meanin' about Tamenund's father, Sarpent, and the idee's a close
idee.  Tamenund is now an elderly man, say eighty every day of
it, and his father was scalped, and tormented, and burnt, when the
present prophet was a youngster.  Yes, if one could see that come
to pass, there wouldn't be much difficulty in yieldin' faith to all
that the missionaries say.  Howsever, I am not ag'in the opinion
now, for you must know, Sarpent, that the great principle of
Christianity is to believe without seeing, and a man should always
act up to his religion and principles, let them be what they may."

"That is strange for a wise nation!" said the Delaware with emphasis.
"The red man looks hard, that he may see and understand."

"Yes, that's plauserble, and is agreeable to mortal pride, but
it's not as deep as it seems.  If we could understand all we see,
Sarpent, there might be not only sense, but safety, in refusin' to
give faith to any one thing that we might find oncomperhensible;
but when there's so many things about which it may be said we know
nothin' at all, why, there's little use, and no reason, in bein'
difficult touchin' any one in partic'lar.  For my part, Delaware,
all my thoughts haven't been on the game, when outlyin' in the
hunts and scoutin's of our youth.  Many's the hour I've passed,
pleasantly enough too, in what is tarmed conterplation by my people.
On such occasions the mind is actyve, though the body seems lazy
and listless.  An open spot on a mountain side, where a wide look
can be had at the heavens and the 'arth, is a most judicious place
for a man to get a just idee of the power of the Manitou, and of his
own littleness.  At such times, there isn't any great disposition
to find fault with little difficulties, in the way of comperhension,
as there are so many big ones to hide them.  Believin' comes easy
enough to me at such times, and if the Lord made man first out
of'arth, as they tell me it is written in the Bible; then turns
him into dust at death; I see no great difficulty in the way to
bringin' him back in the body, though ashes be the only substance
left.  These things lie beyond our understandin', though they may
and do lie so close to our feelin's.  But, of all the doctrines,
Sarpent, that which disturbs me, and disconsarts my mind the most,
is the one which teaches us to think that a pale-face goes to one
heaven, and a red-skin to another; it may separate in death them
which lived much together, and loved each other well, in life!"

"Do the missionaries teach their white brethren to think it is so?"
demanded the Indian, with serious earnestness.  'The Delawares
believe that good men and brave warriors will hunt together in the
same pleasant woods, let them belong to whatever tribe they may;
that all the unjust Indians and cowards will have to sneak in with
the dogs and the wolves to get venison for their lodges."

"Tis wonderful how many consaits mankind have consarnin' happiness
and misery, here after!" exclaimed the hunter, borne away by the
power of his own thoughts.  'Some believe in burnin's and flames,
and some think punishment is to eat with the wolves and dogs.  Then,
ag'in, some fancy heaven to be only the carryin' out of their own
'arthly longin's, while others fancy it all gold and shinin' lights!
Well, I've an idee of my own, in that matter, which is just this,
Sarpent.  Whenever I've done wrong, I've ginirally found 'twas
owin' to some blindness of the mind, which hid the right from view,
and when sight has returned, then has come sorrow and repentance.
Now, I consait that, after death, when the body is laid aside or,
if used at all, is purified and without its longin's, the spirit
sees all things in their ra'al lights and never becomes blind to
truth and justice.  Such bein' the case, all that has been done
in life, is beheld as plainly as the sun is seen at noon; the
good brings joy, while the evil brings sorrow.  There's nothin'
onreasonable in that, but it's agreeable to every man's exper'ence."

"I thought the pale-faces believed all men were wicked; who then
could ever find the white man's heaven?"

"That's ingen'ous, but it falls short of the missionary teachin's.
You'll be Christianized one day, I make no doubt, and then 'twill
all come plain enough.  You must know, Sarpent, that there's been
a great deed of salvation done, that, by God's help, enables all
men to find a pardon for their wickednesses, and that is the essence
of the white man's religion.  I can't stop to talk this matter over
with you any longer, for Hetty's in the canoe, and the furlough
takes me away, but the time will come I hope when you'll feel these
things; for, after all, they must be felt rather than reasoned
about.  Ah's!  me; well, Delaware, there's my hand; you know it's
that of a fri'nd, and will shake it as such, though it never has
done you one half the good its owner wishes it had."

The Indian took the offered hand, and returned its pressure warmly.
Then falling back on his acquired stoicism of manner, which so many
mistake for constitutional indifference, he drew up in reserve,
and prepared to part from his friend with dignity.  Deerslayer,
however, was more natural, nor would he have at all cared about
giving way to his feelings, had not the recent conduct and language
of Judith given him some secret, though ill defined apprehensions
of a scene.  He was too humble to imagine the truth concerning the
actual feelings of that beautiful girl, while he was too observant
not to have noted the struggle she had maintained with herself, and
which had so often led her to the very verge of discovery.  That
something extraordinary was concealed in her breast he thought
obvious enough, and, through a sentiment of manly delicacy that
would have done credit to the highest human refinement, he shrunk
from any exposure of her secret that might subsequently cause regret
to the girl, herself.  He therefore determined to depart, now, and
that without any further manifestations of feeling either from him,
or from others.

"God bless you!  Sarpent - God bless you!" cried the hunter, as
the canoe left the side of the platform.  "Your Manitou and my God
only know when and where we shall meet ag'in; I shall count it a
great blessing, and a full reward for any little good I may have
done on 'arth, if we shall be permitted to know each other, and
to consort together, hereafter, as we have so long done in these
pleasant woods afore us!"

Chingachgook waved his hand.  Drawing the light blanket he wore
over his head, as a Roman would conceal his grief in his robes, he
slowly withdrew into the Ark, in order to indulge his sorrow and
his musings, alone.  Deerslayer did not speak again until the canoe
was half-way to the shore.  Then he suddenly ceased paddling, at
an interruption that came from the mild, musical voice of Hetty.

"Why do you go back to the Hurons, Deerslayer?" demanded the girl.
"They say I am feeble-minded, and such they never harm, but you have
as much sense as Hurry Harry; and more too, Judith thinks, though
I don't see how that can well be."

"Ah!  Hetty, afore we land I must convarse a little with you child,
and that too on matters touching your own welfare, principally.
Stop paddling -or, rather, that the Mingos needn't think we are
plotting and contriving, and so treat us accordingly, just dip your
paddle lightly, and give the canoe a little motion and no more.
That's just the idee and the movement; I see you're ready enough
at an appearance, and might be made useful at a sarcumvention if it
was lawful now to use one - that's just the idee and the movement!
Ah's!  me.  Desait and a false tongue are evil things, and
altogether onbecoming our colour, Hetty, but it is a pleasure and
a satisfaction to outdo the contrivances of a red-skin in the strife
of lawful warfare.  My path has been short, and is like soon to
have an end, but I can see that the wanderings of a warrior aren't
altogether among brambles and difficulties.  There's a bright side
to a warpath, as well as to most other things, if we'll only have
the wisdom to see it, and the ginerosity to own it."

"And why should your warpath, as you call it, come so near to an
end, Deerslayer?"

"Because, my good girl, my furlough comes so near to an end.  They're
likely to have pretty much the same tarmination, as regards time,
one following on the heels of the other, as a matter of course."

"I don't understand your meaning, Deerslayer -" returned the girl,
looking a little bewildered.  "Mother always said people ought to
speak more plainly to me than to most other persons, because I'm
feeble minded.  Those that are feeble minded, don't understand as
easily as those that have sense."

"Well then, Hetty, the simple truth is this.  You know that I'm now
a captyve to the Hurons, and captyves can't do, in all things, as
they please -"

"But how can you be a captive," eagerly interrupted the girl
-"when you are out here on the lake, in father's best canoe, and
the Indians are in the woods with no canoe at all?  That can't be
true, Deerslayer!"

"I wish with all my heart and soul, Hetty, that you was right, and
that I was wrong, instead of your bein' all wrong, and I bein' only
too near the truth.  Free as I seem to your eyes, gal, I'm bound
hand and foot in ra'ality."

"Well it is a great misfortune not to have sense!  Now I can't see
or understand that you are a captive, or bound in any manner.  If
you are bound, with what are your hands and feet fastened?"

"With a furlough, gal; that's a thong that binds tighter than any
chain.  One may be broken, but the other can't.  Ropes and chains
allow of knives, and desait, and contrivances; but a furlough can
be neither cut, slipped nor sarcumvented."

"What sort of a thing is a furlough, then, if it be stronger than
hemp or iron?  I never saw a furlough."

"I hope you may never feel one, gal; the tie is altogether in the
feelin's, in these matters, and therefore is to be felt and not
seen.  You can understand what it is to give a promise, I dare to
say, good little Hetty?"

"Certainly.  A promise is to say you will do a thing, and that binds
you to be as good as your word.  Mother always kept her promises
to me, and then she said it would be wicked if I didn't keep my
promises to her, and to every body else."

"You have had a good mother, in some matters, child, whatever she
may have been in other some.  That is a promise, and as you say it
must be kept.  Now, I fell into the hands of the Mingos last night,
and they let me come off to see my fri'nds and send messages in to
my own colour, if any such feel consarn on my account, on condition
that I shall be back when the sun is up today, and take whatever
their revenge and hatred can contrive, in the way of torments, in
satisfaction for the life of a warrior that fell by my rifle, as
well as for that of the young woman shot by Hurry, and other 
disapp'intments met with on and about this lake.  What is called
a promise atween mother and darter, or even atween strangers in
the settlements is called a furlough when given by one soldier to
another, on a warpath.  And now I suppose you understand my 
situation, Hetty."

The girl made no answer for some time, but she ceased paddling
altogether, as if the novel idea distracted her mind too much to
admit of other employment.  Then she resumed the dialogue earnestly
and with solicitude.

"Do you think the Hurons will have the heart to do what you say,
Deerslayer?" she asked.  "I have found them kind and harmless."

"That's true enough as consarns one like you, Hetty, but it's a
very different affair when it comes to an open inimy, and he too
the owner of a pretty sartain rifle.  I don't say that they bear
me special malice on account of any expl'ites already performed,
for that would be bragging, as it might be, on the varge of the
grave, but it's no vanity to believe that they know one of their
bravest and cunnin'est chiefs fell by my hands.  Such bein' the
case, the tribe would reproach them if they failed to send the
spirit of a pale-face to keep the company of the spirit of their
red brother; always supposin' that he can catch it.  I look for no
marcy, Hetty, at their hands; and my principal sorrow is that such
a calamity should befall me on my first warpath: that it would come
sooner or later, every soldier counts on and expects."

"The Hurons shall not harm you, Deerslayer," cried the girl, much
excited -"Tis wicked as well as cruel; I have the Bible, here, to
tell them so.  Do you think I would stand by and see you tormented?"

"I hope not, my good Hetty, I hope not; and, therefore, when the
moment comes, I expect you will move off, and not be a witness of
what you can't help, while it would grieve you.  But, I haven't
stopped the paddles to talk of my own afflictions and difficulties,
but to speak a little plainly to you, gal, consarnin' your own
matters."

"What can you have to say to me, Deerslayer!  Since mother died,
few talk to me of such things."

"So much the worse, poor gal; yes, 'tis so much the worse, for one
of your state of mind needs frequent talking to, in order to escape
the snares and desaits of this wicked world.  You haven't forgotten
Hurry Harry, gal, so soon, I calculate?"

"I!  - I forget Henry March!" exclaimed Hetty, starting.  "Why
should I forget him, Deerslayer, when he is our friend, and only
left us last night.  Then the large bright star that mother loved
so much to gaze at was just over the top of yonder tall pine on the
mountain, as Hurry got into the canoe; and when you landed him on
the point, near the east bay, it wasn't more than the length of
Judith's handsomest ribbon above it."

"And how can you know how long I was gone, or how far I went to
land Hurry, seein' you were not with us, and the distance was so
great, to say nothing of the night?"

"Oh!  I know when it was, well enough," returned Hetty positively
-"There's more ways than one for counting time and distance.  When
the mind is engaged, it is better than any clock.  Mine is feeble,
I know, but it goes true enough in all that touches poor Hurry
Harry.  Judith will never marry March, Deerslayer."

"That's the p'int, Hetty; that's the very p'int I want to come to.
I suppose you know that it's nat'ral for young people to have kind
feelin's for one another, more especially when one happens to be a
youth and t'other a maiden.  Now, one of your years and mind, gal,
that has neither father nor mother, and who lives in a wilderness
frequented by hunters and trappers, needs be on her guard against
evils she little dreams of."

"What harm can it be to think well of a fellow creature," returned
Hetty simply, though the conscious blood was stealing to her cheeks
in spite of a spirit so pure that it scarce knew why it prompted
the blush, "the Bible tells us to 'love them who despitefully use'
us, and why shouldn't we like them that do not."

"Ah!  Hetty, the love of the missionaries isn't the sort of likin'
I mean.  Answer me one thing, child; do you believe yourself to
have mind enough to become a wife, and a mother?"

"That's not a proper question to ask a young woman, Deerslayer,
and I'll not answer it," returned the girl, in a reproving manner
- much as a parent rebukes a child for an act of indiscretion.  "If
you have any thing to say about Hurry, I'll hear that - but you
must not speak evil of him; he is absent, and 'tis unkind to talk
evil of the absent."

"Your mother has given you so many good lessons, Hetty, that
my fears for you are not as great as they were.  Nevertheless, a
young woman without parents, in your state of mind, and who is not
without beauty, must always be in danger in such a lawless region
as this.  I would say nothin' amiss of Hurry, who, in the main,
is not a bad man for one of his callin', but you ought to know one
thing, which it may not be altogether pleasant to tell you, but
which must be said.  March has a desperate likin' for your sister
Judith."

"Well, what of that?  Everybody admires Judith, she's so handsome,
and Hurry has told me, again and again, how much he wishes to marry
her.  But that will never come to pass, for Judith don't like Hurry.
She likes another, and talks about him in her sleep; though you
need not ask me who he is, for all the gold in King George's crown,
and all the jewels too, wouldn't tempt me to tell you his name.
If sisters can't keep each other's secrets, who can?"

"Sartainly, I do not wish you to tell me, Hetty, nor would it be
any advantage to a dyin' man to know.  What the tongue says when
the mind's asleep, neither head nor heart is answerable for."

"I wish I knew why Judith talks so much in her sleep, about officers,
and honest hearts, and false tongues, but I suppose she don't like
to tell me, as I'm feeble minded.  Isn't it odd, Deerslayer, that
Judith don't like Hurry -he who is the bravest looking youth that
ever comes upon the lake, and is as handsome as she is herself.
Father always said they would be the comeliest couple in the country,
though mother didn't fancy March any more than Judith.  There's no
telling what will happen, they say, until things actually come to
pass."

"Ahs!  me - well, poor Hetty, 'tis of no great use to talk to them
that can't understand you, and so I'll say no more about what I did
wish to speak of, though it lay heavy on my mind.  Put the paddle
in motion ag'in, gal, and we'll push for the shore, for the sun is
nearly up, and my furlough is almost out."

The canoe now glided ahead, holding its way towards the point
where Deerslayer well knew that his enemies expected him, and where
he now began to be afraid he might not arrive in season to redeem
his plighted faith.  Hetty, perceiving his impatience without very
clearly comprehending its cause, however, seconded his efforts in
a way that soon rendered their timely return no longer a matter of
doubt.  Then, and then only, did the young man suffer his exertions
to flag, and Hetty began, again, to prattle in her simple confiding
manner, though nothing farther was uttered that it may be thought
necessary to relate.



Chapter XXVII.


    "Thou hast been busy, Death, this day, and yet
    But half thy work is done!  The gates of hell
    Are thronged, yet twice ten thousand spirits more
    Who from their warm and healthful tenements
    Fear no divorce; must, ere the sun go down,
    Enter the world of woe!"-

    Southey, Roderick, the Last of the Goths, XXIV, i-6.

One experienced in the signs of the heavens, would have seen that
the sun wanted but two or three minutes of the zenith, when Deerslayer
landed on the point, where the Hurons were now encamped, nearly
abreast of the castle.  This spot was similar to the one already
described, with the exception that the surface of the land
was less broken, and less crowded with trees.  Owing to these two
circumstances, it was all the better suited to the purpose for which
it had been selected, the space beneath the branches bearing some
resemblance to a densely wooded lawn.  Favoured by its position and
its spring, it had been much resorted to by savages and hunters,
and the natural grasses had succeeded their fires, leaving an
appearance of sward in places, a very unusual accompaniment of the
virgin forest.  Nor was the margin of water fringed with bushes,
as on so much of its shore, but the eye penetrated the woods
immediately on reaching the strand, commanding nearly the whole
area of the projection.

If it was a point of honor with the Indian warrior to redeem his
word, when pledged to return and meet his death at a given hour,
so was it a point of characteristic pride to show no womanish
impatience, but to reappear as nearly as possible at the appointed
moment.  It was well not to exceed the grace accorded by the
generosity of the enemy, but it was better to meet it to a minute.
Something of this dramatic effect mingles with most of the graver
usages of the American aborigines, and no doubt, like the prevalence
of a similar feeling among people more sophisticated and refined,
may be referred to a principle of nature.  We all love the wonderful,
and when it comes attended by chivalrous self-devotion and a rigid
regard to honor, it presents itself to our admiration in a shape
doubly attractive.  As respects Deerslayer, though he took a pride
in showing his white blood, by often deviating from the usages of
the red-men, he frequently dropped into their customs, and oftener
into their feelings, unconsciously to himself, in consequence of
having no other arbiters to appeal to, than their judgments and
tastes.  On the present occasion, he would have abstained from
betraying a feverish haste by a too speedy return, since it would
have contained a tacit admission that the time asked for was more
than had been wanted; but, on the other hand, had the idea occurred
to him, he would have quickened his movements a little, in order to
avoid the dramatic appearance of returning at the precise instant
set as the utmost limit of his absence.  Still, accident had interfered
to defeat the last intention, for when the young man put his foot
on the point, and advanced with a steady tread towards the group of
chiefs that was seated in grave array on a fallen tree, the oldest
of their number cast his eye upward, at an opening in the trees,
and pointed out to his companions the startling fact that the sun
was just entering a space that was known to mark the zenith.  A
common, but low exclamation of surprise and admiration escaped every
mouth, and the grim warriors looked at each other, some with envy
and disappointment, some with astonishment at the precise accuracy
of their victim, and others with a more generous and liberal feeling.
The American Indian always deemed his moral victories the noblest,
prizing the groans and yielding of his victim under torture, more
than the trophy of his scalp; and the trophy itself more than his
life.  To slay, and not to bring off the proof of victory, indeed,
was scarcely deemed honorable, even these rude and fierce tenants
of the forest, like their more nurtured brethren of the court and
the camp, having set up for themselves imaginary and arbitrary
points of honor, to supplant the conclusions of the right and the
decisions of reason.

The Hurons had been divided in their opinions concerning the
probability of their captive's return.  Most among them, indeed, had
not expected it possible for a pale-face to come back voluntarily,
and meet the known penalties of an Indian torture; but a few of
the seniors expected better things from one who had already shown
himself so singularly cool, brave and upright.  The party had
come to its decision, however, less in the expectation of finding
the pledge redeemed, than in the hope of disgracing the Delawares
by casting into their teeth the delinquency of one bred in their
villages.  They would have greatly preferred that Chingachgook
should be their prisoner, and prove the traitor, but the pale-face
scion of the hated stock was no bad substitute for their purposes,
failing in their designs against the ancient stem.  With a view to
render their triumph as signal as possible, in the event of the
hour's passing without the reappearance of the hunter, all the
warriors and scouts of the party had been called in, and the whole
band, men, women and children, was now assembled at this single
point, to be a witness of the expected scene.  As the castle was
in plain view, and by no means distant, it was easily watched by
daylight, and, it being thought that its inmates were now limited
to Hurry, the Delaware and the two girls, no apprehensions were
felt of their being able to escape unseen.  A large raft having a
breast-work of logs had been prepared, and was in actual readiness
to be used against either Ark or castle as occasion might require, so
soon as the fate of Deerslayer was determined, the seniors of the
party having come to the opinion that it was getting to be hazardous
to delay their departure for Canada beyond the coming night.  In
short the band waited merely to dispose of this single affair,
ere it brought matters with those in the Castle to a crisis, and
prepared to commence its retreat towards the distant waters of
Ontario.

It was an imposing scene into which Deerslayer now found himself
advancing.  All the older warriors were seated on the trunk of
the fallen tree, waiting his approach with grave decorum.  On the
right stood the young men, armed, while left was occupied by the
women and children.  In the centre was an open space of considerable
extent, always canopied by trees, but from which the underbrush,
dead wood, and other obstacles had been carefully removed.  The
more open area had probably been much used by former parties, for
this was the place where the appearance of a sward was the most
decided.  The arches of the woods, even at high noon, cast their
sombre shadows on the spot, which the brilliant rays of the sun
that struggled through the leaves contributed to mellow, and, if
such an expression can be used, to illuminate.  It was probably
from a similar scene that the mind of man first got its idea of the
effects of gothic tracery and churchly hues, this temple of nature
producing some such effect, so far as light and shadow were concerned,
as the well-known offspring of human invention.

As was not unusual among the tribes and wandering bands of the
Aborigines, two chiefs shared, in nearly equal degrees, the principal
and primitive authority that was wielded over these children of
the forest.  There were several who might claim the distinction of
being chief men, but the two in question were so much superior to
all the rest in influence, that, when they agreed, no one disputed
their mandates, and when they were divided the band hesitated, like
men who had lost their governing principle of action.  It was also
in conformity with practice, perhaps we might add in conformity
with nature, that one of the chiefs was indebted to his mind for
his influence, whereas the other owed his distinction altogether
to qualities that were physical.  One was a senior, well known for
eloquence in debate, wisdom in council, and prudence in measures; while
his great competitor, if not his rival, was a brave distinguished
in war, notorious for ferocity, and remarkable, in the way of
intellect, for nothing but the cunning and expedients of the war
path.  The first was Rivenoak, who has already been introduced to
the reader, while the last was called le Panth'ere, in the language
of the Canadas, or the Panther, to resort to the vernacular of
the English colonies.  The appellation of the fighting chief was
supposed to indicate the qualities of the warrior, agreeably to
a practice of the red man's nomenclature, ferocity, cunning and
treachery being, perhaps, the distinctive features of his character.
The title had been received from the French, and was prized so much
the more from that circumstance, the Indian submitting profoundly
to the greater intelligence of his pale-face allies, in most things
of this nature.  How well the sobriquet was merited will be seen
in the sequel.

Rivenoak and the Panther sat side by side awaiting the approach
of their prisoner, as Deerslayer put his moccasined foot on the
strand, nor did either move, or utter a syllable, until the young
man had advanced into the centre of the area, and proclaimed his
presence with his voice.  This was done firmly, though in the simple
manner that marked the character of the individual.

"Here I am, Mingos," he said, in the dialect of the Delawares, a
language that most present understood; "here I am, and there is the
sun.  One is not more true to the laws of natur', than the other
has proved true to his word.  I am your prisoner; do with me what
you please.  My business with man and 'arth is settled; nothing
remains now but to meet the white man's God, accordin' to a white
man's duties and gifts."

A murmur of approbation escaped even the women at this address,
and, for an instant there was a strong and pretty general desire
to adopt into the tribe one who owned so brave a spirit.  Still
there were dissenters from this wish, among the principal of whom
might be classed the Panther, and his sister, Ie Sumach, so called
from the number of her children, who was the widow of le Loup
Cervier, now known to have fallen by the hand of the captive.
Native ferocity held one in subjection, while the corroding passion
of revenge prevented the other from admitting any gentler feeling
at the moment.  Not so with Rivenoak.  This chief arose, stretched
his arm before him in a gesture of courtesy, and paid his compliments
with an ease and dignity that a prince might have envied.  As,
in that band, his wisdom and eloquence were confessedly without
rivals, he knew that on himself would properly fall the duty of
first replying to the speech of the pale-face.

"Pale-face, you are honest," said the Huron orator.  "My people
are happy in having captured a man, and not a skulking fox.  We
now know you; we shall treat you like a brave.  If you have slain
one of our warriors, and helped to kill others, you have a life
of your own ready to give away in return.  Some of my young men
thought that the blood of a pale-face was too thin; that it would
refuse to run under the Huron knife.  You will show them it is not
so; your heart is stout, as well as your body.  It is a pleasure to
make such a prisoner; should my warriors say that the death of Ie
Loup Cervier ought not to be forgotten, and that he cannot travel
towards the land of spirits alone, that his enemy must be sent
to overtake him, they will remember that he fell by the hand of a
brave, and send you after him with such signs of our friendship as
shall not make him ashamed to keep your company.  I have spoken;
you know what I have said."

"True enough, Mingo, all true as the gospel," returned the simple
minded hunter, 'you have spoken, and I do know not only what you
have said, but, what is still more important, what you mean.  I
dare to say your warrior the Lynx was a stout-hearted brave, and
worthy of your fri'ndship and respect, but I do not feel unworthy
to keep his company, without any passport from your hands.  Nevertheless,
here I am, ready to receive judgment from your council, if, indeed,
the matter was not detarmined among you afore I got back."

"My old men would not sit in council over a pale-face until they
saw him among them," answered Rivenoak, looking around him a little
ironically; "they said it would be like sitting in council over
the winds; they go where they will, and come back as they see fit,
and not otherwise.  There was one voice that spoke in your favor,
Deerslayer, but it was alone, like the song of the wren whose mate
has been struck by the hawk."

"I thank that voice whosever it may have been, Mingo, and will say
it was as true a voice as the rest were lying voices.  A furlough
is as binding on a pale-face, if he be honest, as it is on a red-skin,
and was it not so, I would never bring disgrace on the Delawares,
among whom I may be said to have received my edication.  But words
are useless, and lead to braggin' feelin's; here I am; act your
will on me."

Rivenoak made a sign of acquiescence, and then a short conference
was privately held among the chiefs.  As soon as the latter ended,
three or four young men fell back from among the armed group, and
disappeared.  Then it was signified to the prisoner that he was
at liberty to go at large on the point, until a council was held
concerning his fate.  There was more of seeming, than of real
confidence, however, in this apparent liberality, inasmuch as the
young men mentioned already formed a line of sentinels across the
breadth of the point, inland, and escape from any other part was
out of the question.  Even the canoe was removed beyond this line of
sentinels, to a spot where it was considered safe from any sudden
attempt.  These precautions did not proceed from a failure of
confidence, but from the circumstance that the prisoner had now
complied with all the required conditions of his parole, and it
would have been considered a commendable and honorable exploit to
escape from his foes.  So nice, indeed, were the distinctions drawn
by the savages in cases of this nature, that they often gave their
victims a chance to evade the torture, deeming it as creditable
to the captors to overtake, or to outwit a fugitive, when his
exertions were supposed to be quickened by the extreme jeopardy
of his situation, as it was for him to get clear from so much
extraordinary vigilance.

Nor was Deerslayer unconscious of, or forgetful, of his rights and
of his opportunities.  Could he now have seen any probable opening
for an escape, the attempt would not have been delayed a minute.  But
the case seem'd desperate.  He was aware of the line of sentinels,
and felt the difficulty of breaking through it, unharmed.  The lake
offered no advantages, as the canoe would have given his foes the
greatest facilities for overtaking him; else would he have found
it no difficult task to swim as far as the castle.  As he walked
about the point, he even examined the spot to ascertain if it
offered no place of concealment, but its openness, its size, and
the hundred watchful glances that were turned towards him, even
while those who made them affected not to see him, prevented any
such expedient from succeeding.  The dread and disgrace of failure
had no influence on Deerslayer, who deemed it even a point of honor
to reason and feel like a white man, rather than as an Indian, and
who felt it a sort of duty to do all he could that did not involve
a dereliction from principle, in order to save his life.  Still he
hesitated about making the effort, for he also felt that he ought
to see the chance of success before he committed himself.

In the mean time the business of the camp appeared to proceed in
its regular train.  The chiefs consulted apart, admitting no one
but the Sumach to their councils, for she, the widow of the fallen
warrior, had an exclusive right to be heard on such an occasion.
The young men strolled about in indolent listlessness, awaiting the
result with Indian patience, while the females prepared the feast
that was to celebrate the termination of the affair, whether it
proved fortunate or otherwise for our hero.  No one betrayed feeling,
and an indifferent observer, beyond the extreme watchfulness of
the sentinels, would have detected no extraordinary movement or
sensation to denote the real state of things.  Two or three old
women put their heads together, and it appeared unfavorably to
the prospects of Deerslayer, by their scowling looks, and angry
gestures; but a group of Indian girls were evidently animated by a
different impulse, as was apparent by stolen glances that expressed
pity and regret.  In this condition of the camp, an hour soon glided
away.

Suspense is perhaps the feeling of all others that is most difficult
to be supported.  When Deerslayer landed, he fully expected in
the course of a few minutes to undergo the tortures of an Indian
revenge, and he was prepared to meet his fate manfully; but, the
delay proved far more trying than the nearer approach of suffering,
and the intended victim began seriously to meditate some desperate
effort at escape, as it might be from sheer anxiety to terminate
the scene, when he was suddenly summoned, to appear once more in
front of his judges, who had already arranged the band in its former
order, in readiness to receive him.

"Killer of the Deer," commenced Rivenoak, as soon as his captive
stood before him, "my aged men have listened to wise words; they
are ready to speak.  You are a man whose fathers came from beyond
the rising sun; we are children of the setting sun; we turn our faces
towards the Great Sweet Lakes, when we look towards our villages.
It may be a wide country and full of riches towards the morning,
but it is very pleasant towards the evening.  We love most to look
in that direction.  When we gaze at the east, we feel afraid, canoe
after canoe bringing more and more of your people in the track of
the sun, as if their land was so full as to run over.  The red men
are few already; they have need of help.  One of our best lodges
has lately been emptied by the death of its master; it will be a
long time before his son can grow big enough to sit in his place.
There is his widow; she will want venison to feed her and her
children, for her sons are yet like the young of the robin, before
they quit the nest.  By your hand has this great calamity befallen
her.  She has two duties; one to le Loup Cervier, and one to his
children.  Scalp for scalp, life for life, blood for blood, is one
law; to feed her young, another.  We know you, Killer of the Deer.
You are honest; when you say a thing, it is so.  You have but
one tongue, and that is not forked, like a snake's.  Your head is
never hid in the grass; all can see it.  What you say, that will
you do.  You are just.  When you have done wrong, it is your wish
to do right, again, as soon as you can.  Here, is the Sumach; she
is alone in her wigwam, with children crying around her for food
- yonder is a rifle; it is loaded and ready to be fired.  Take the
gun, go forth and shoot a deer; bring the venison and lay it before
the widow of Le Loup Cervier, feed her children; call yourself her
husband.  After which, your heart will no longer be Delaware, but
Huron; le Sumach's ears will not hear the cries of her children;
my people will count the proper number of warriors."

"I fear'd this, Rivenoak," answered Deerslayer, when the other
had ceased speaking -"yes, I did dread that it would come to this.
Howsever, the truth is soon told, and that will put an end to all
expectations on this head.  Mingo, I'm white and Christian born;
't would ill become me to take a wife, under red-skin forms, from
among heathen.  That which I wouldn't do, in peaceable times, and
under a bright sun, still less would I do behind clouds, in order
to save my life.  I may never marry; most likely Providence in
putting me up here in the woods, has intended I should live single,
and without a lodge of my own; but should such a thing come to pass,
none but a woman of my own colour and gifts shall darken the door
of my wigwam.  As for feeding the young of your dead warrior, I
would do that cheerfully, could it be done without discredit; but
it cannot, seeing that I can never live in a Huron village.  Your
own young men must find the Sumach in venison, and the next time
she marries, let her take a husband whose legs are not long enough
to overrun territory that don't belong to him.  We fou't a fair
battle, and he fell; in this there is nothin' but what a brave
expects, and should be ready to meet.  As for getting a Mingo
heart, as well might you expect to see gray hairs on a boy, or the
blackberry growing on the pine.  No - no Huron; my gifts are white
so far as wives are consarned; it is Delaware, in all things touchin'
Injins."

These words were scarcely out of the mouth of Deerslayer, before
a common murmur betrayed the dissatisfaction with which they had
been heard.  The aged women, in particular, were loud in their
expressions of disgust, and the gentle Sumach, herself, a woman quite
old enough to be our hero's mother, was not the least pacific in her
denunciations.  But all the other manifestations of disappointment
and discontent were thrown into the background, by the fierce resentment
of the Panther.  This grim chief had thought it a degradation to
permit his sister to become the wife of a pale-face of the Yengeese
at all, and had only given a reluctant consent to the arrangement
-one by no means unusual among the Indians, however - at the
earnest solicitations of the bereaved widow; and it goaded him to
the quick to find his condescension slighted, the honor he had with
so much regret been persuaded to accord, condemned.  The animal
from which he got his name does not glare on his intended prey with
more frightful ferocity than his eyes gleamed on the captive, nor
was his arm backward in seconding the fierce resentment that almost
consumed his breast.

"Dog of the pale-faces!" he exclaimed in Iroquois, "go yell among
the curs of your own evil hunting grounds!"

The denunciation was accompanied by an appropriate action.  Even
while speaking his arm was lifted, and the tomahawk hurled.  Luckily
the loud tones of the speaker had drawn the eye of Deerslayer towards
him, else would that moment have probably closed his career.  So
great was the dexterity with which this dangerous weapon was thrown,
and so deadly the intent, that it would have riven the scull of the
prisoner, had he not stretched forth an arm, and caught the handle
in one of its turns, with a readiness quite as remarkable as
the skill with which the missile had been hurled.  The projectile
force was so great, notwithstanding, that when Deerslayer's arm
was arrested, his hand was raised above and behind his own head,
and in the very attitude necessary to return the attack.  It is not
certain whether the circumstance of finding himself unexpectedly in
this menacing posture and armed tempted the young man to retaliate,
or whether sudden resentment overcame his forbearance and prudence.
His eye kindled, however, and a small red spot appeared on each
cheek, while he cast all his energy into the effort of his arm,
and threw back the weapon at his assailant.  The unexpectedness of
this blow contributed to its success, the Panther neither raising
an arm, nor bending his head to avoid it.  The keen little axe
struck the victim in a perpendicular line with the nose, directly
between the eyes, literally braining him on the spot.  Sallying
forward, as the serpent darts at its enemy even while receiving its
own death wound, this man of powerful frame fell his length into
the open area formed by the circle, quivering in death.  A common
rush to his relief left the captive, in a single instant, quite
without the crowd, and, willing to make one desperate effort for
life, he bounded off with the activity of a deer.  There was but a
breathless instant, when the whole band, old and young, women and
children, abandoning the lifeless body of the Panther where it lay,
raised the yell of alarm and followed in pursuit.

Sudden as had been the event which induced Deerslayer to make this
desperate trial of speed, his mind was not wholly unprepared for
the fearful emergency.  In the course of the past hour, he had
pondered well on the chances of such an experiment, and had shrewdly
calculated all the details of success and failure.  At the first
leap, therefore, his body was completely under the direction of an
intelligence that turned all its efforts to the best account, and
prevented everything like hesitation or indecision at the important
instant of the start.  To this alone was he indebted for the first
great advantage, that of getting through the line of sentinels
unharmed.  The manner in which this was done, though sufficiently
simple, merits a description.

Although the shores of the point were not fringed with bushes,
as was the case with most of the others on the lake, it was owing
altogether to the circumstance that the spot had been so much used
by hunters and fishermen.  This fringe commenced on what might
be termed the main land, and was as dense as usual, extending in
long lines both north and south.  In the latter direction, then,
Deerslayer held his way, and, as the sentinels were a little without
the commencement of this thicket, before the alarm was clearly
communicated to them the fugitive had gained its cover.  To run
among the bushes, however, was out of the question, and Deerslayer
held his way, for some forty or fifty yards, in the water, which
was barely knee deep, offering as great an obstacle to the speed
of his pursuers as it did to his own.  As soon as a favorable spot
presented, he darted through the line of bushes and issued into the
open woods.  Several rifles were discharged at Deerslayer while in
the water, and more followed as he came out into the comparative
exposure of the clear forest.  But the direction of his line of
flight, which partially crossed that of the fire, the haste with
which the weapons had been aimed, and the general confusion that
prevailed in the camp prevented any harm from being done.  Bullets
whistled past him, and many cut twigs from the branches at his
side, but not one touched even his dress.  The delay caused by
these fruitless attempts was of great service to the fugitive, who
had gained more than a hundred yards on even the leading men of
the Hurons, ere something like concert and order had entered into
the chase.  To think of following with rifles in hand was out of
the question, and after emptying their pieces in vague hopes of
wounding their captive, the best runners of the Indians threw them
aside, calling out to the women and boys to recover and load them,
again, as soon as possible.

Deerslayer knew too well the desperate nature of the struggle in
which he was engaged to lose one of the precious moments.  He also
knew that his only hope was to run in a straight line, for as soon
as he began to turn, or double, the greater number of his pursuers
would put escape out of the question.  He held his way therefore,
in a diagonal direction up the acclivity, which was neither very
high nor very steep in this part of the mountain, but which was
sufficiently toilsome for one contending for life, to render it
painfully oppressive.  There, however, he slackened his speed to
recover breath, proceeding even at a quick walk, or a slow trot,
along the more difficult parts of the way.  The Hurons were whooping
and leaping behind him, but this he disregarded, well knowing they
must overcome the difficulties he had surmounted ere they could
reach the elevation to which he had attained.  The summit of the
first hill was now quite near him, and he saw