solitude.  The graves
could not be found.  Either the elements had obliterated their
traces, or time had caused those who looked for them to forget
their position.

The Ark was discovered stranded on the eastern shore, where it had
long before been driven with the prevalent northwest winds.  It
lay on the sandy extremity of a long low point, that is situated
about two miles from the outlet, and which is itself fast disappearing
before the action of the elements.  The scow was filled with water,
the cabin unroofed, and the logs were decaying.  Some of its coarser
furniture still remained, and the heart of Deerslayer beat quick,
as he found a ribbon of Judith's fluttering from a log.  It recalled
all her beauty, and we may add all her failings.  Although the girl
had never touched his heart, the Hawkeye, for so we ought now to
call him, still retained a kind and sincere interest in her welfare.
He tore away the ribbon, and knotted it to the stock of Killdeer,
which had been the gift of the girl herself.

A few miles farther up the lake, another of the canoes was discovered,
and on the point where the party finally landed, were found those
which had been left there upon the shore.  That in which the present
navigation was made, and the one discovered on the eastern shore,
had dropped through the decayed floor of the castle, drifted past
the falling palisades, and had been thrown as waifs upon the beach.

From all these signs, it was probable the lake had not been visited
since the occurrence of the final scene of our tale.  Accident or
tradition had rendered it again a spot sacred to nature, the frequent
wars and the feeble population of the colonies still confining the
settlements within narrow boundaries.  Chingachgook and his friend
left the spot with melancholy feelings.  It had been the region
of their First War Path, and it carried back the minds of both to
scenes of tenderness, as well as to hours of triumph.  They held
their way towards the Mohawk in silence, however, to rush into
new adventures, as stirring and as remarkable as those which had
attended their opening careers on this lovely lake.  At a later
day they returned to the place, where the Indian found a grave.

Time and circumstances have drawn an impenetrable mystery around
all else connected with the Hutters.  They lived, erred, died, and
are forgotten.  None connected have felt sufficient interest in
the disgraced and disgracing to withdraw the veil, and a century is
about to erase even the recollection of their names.  The history
of crime is ever revolting, and it is fortunate that few love to
dwell on its incidents.  The sins of the family have long since
been arraigned at the judgment seat of God, or are registered for
the terrible settlement of the last great day.

The same fate attended Judith.  When Hawkeye reached the garrison
on the Mohawk he enquired anxiously after that lovely but misguided
creature.  None knew her - even her person was no longer remembered.
Other officers had, again and again, succeeded the Warleys and
Craigs and Grahams, though an old sergeant of the garrison, who
had lately come from England, was enabled to tell our hero that Sir
Robert Warley lived on his paternal estates, and that there was a
lady of rare beauty in the Lodge who had great influence over him,
though she did not bear his name.  Whether this was Judith relapsed
into her early failing, or some other victim of the soldier's, Hawkeye
never knew, nor would it be pleasant or profitable to inquire.  We
live in a world of transgressions and selfishness, and no pictures
that represent us otherwise can be true, though, happily, for
human nature, gleamings of that pure spirit in whose likeness man
has been fashioned are to be seen, relieving its deformities, and
mitigating if not excusing its crimes.








This etext was produced from the 1890 Macmillan and Co. edition by
David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE DOVE IN THE EAGLE'S NEST

by Charlotte M. Yonge




INTRODUCTION



In sending forth this little book, I am inclined to add a few
explanatory words as to the use I have made of historical personages.
The origin of the whole story was probably Freytag's first series of
pictures of German Life:  probably, I say, for its first commencement
was a dream, dreamt some weeks after reading that most interesting
collection of sketches.  The return of the squire with the tidings of
the death of the two knights was vividly depicted in sleep; and,
though without local habitation or name, the scene was most likely to
have been a reflection from the wild scenes so lately read of.

In fact, waking thoughts decided that such a catastrophe could hardly
have happened anywhere but in Germany, or in Scotland; and the
contrast between the cultivation in the free cities and the savagery
of the independent barons made the former the more suitable region
for the adventures.  The time could only be before the taming and
bringing into order of the empire, when the Imperial cities were in
their greatest splendour, the last free nobles in course of being
reduced from their lawless liberty, and the House of Austria
beginning to acquire its preponderance over the other princely
families.

M. Freytag's books, and Hegewisch's History of Maximilian, will, I
think, be found fully to bear out the picture I have tried to give of
the state of things in the reign of the Emperor Friedrich III., when,
for want of any other law, Faust recht, or fist right, ruled; i.e. an
offended nobleman, having once sent a Fehde-brief to his adversary,
was thenceforth at liberty to revenge himself by a private war, in
which, for the wrong inflicted, no justice was exacted.

Hegewisch remarks that the only benefit of this custom was, that the
honour of subscribing a feud-brief was so highly esteemed that it
induced the nobles to learn to write!  The League of St. George and
the Swabian League were the means of gradually putting down this
authorized condition of deadly feud.

This was in the days of Maximilian's youth.  He is a prince who seems
to have been almost as inferior in his foreign to what he was in his
domestic policy as was Queen Elizabeth.  He is chiefly familiar to us
as failing to keep up his authority in Flanders after the death of
Mary of Burgundy, as lingering to fulfil his engagement with Anne of
Brittany till he lost her and her duchy, as incurring ridicule by his
ill-managed schemes in Italy, and the vast projects that he was
always forming without either means or steadiness to carry them out,
by his perpetual impecuniosity and slippery dealing; and in his old
age he has become rather the laughing-stock of historians.

But there is much that is melancholy in the sight of a man endowed
with genius, unbalanced by the force of character that secures
success, and with an ardent nature whose intention overleapt
obstacles that in practice he found insuperable.  At home Maximilian
raised the Imperial power from a mere cipher to considerable weight.
We judge him as if he had been born in the purple and succeeded to a
defined power like his descendants.  We forget that the head of the
Holy Roman Empire had been, ever since the extinction of the Swabian
line, a mere mark for ambitious princes to shoot at, with everything
expected from him, and no means to do anything.  Maximilian's own
father was an avaricious, undignified old man, not until near his
death Archduke of even all Austria, and with anarchy prevailing
everywhere under his nominal rule.  It was in the time of Maximilian
that the Empire became as compact and united a body as could be hoped
of anything so unwieldy, that law was at least acknowledged, Faust
recht for ever abolished, and the Emperor became once more a real
power.

The man under whom all this was effected could have been no fool;
yet, as he said himself, he reigned over a nation of kings, who each
chose to rule for himself; and the uncertainty of supplies of men or
money to be gained from them made him so often fail necessarily in
his engagements, that he acquired a shiftiness and callousness to
breaches of promise, which became the worst flaw in his character.
But of the fascination of his manner there can be no doubt.  Even
Henry VIII.'s English ambassadors, when forced to own how little they
could depend on him, and how dangerous it was to let subsidies pass
through his fingers, still show themselves under a sort of
enchantment of devotion to his person, and this in his old age, and
when his conduct was most inexcusable and provoking.

His variety of powers was wonderful.  He was learned in many
languages--in all those of his empire or hereditary states, and in
many besides; and he had an ardent love of books, both classical and
modern.  He delighted in music, painting, architecture, and many arts
of a more mechanical description; wrote treatises on all these, and
on other subjects, especially gardening and gunnery.  He was the
inventor of an improved lock to the arquebus, and first divined how
to adapt the disposition of his troops to the use of the newly-
discovered fire-arms.  And in all these things his versatile head and
ready hand were personally employed, not by deputy; while coupled
with so much artistic taste was a violent passion for hunting, which
carried him through many hairbreadth 'scapes.  "It was plain," he
used to say, "that God Almighty ruled the world, or how could things
go on with a rogue like Alexander VI. at the head of the Church, and
a mere huntsman like himself at the head of the Empire."  His bon-
mots are numerous, all thoroughly characteristic, and showing that
brilliancy in conversation must have been one of his greatest charms.
It seems as if only self-control and resolution were wanting to have
made him a Charles, or an Alfred, the Great.

The romance of his marriage with the heiress of Burgundy is one of
the best known parts of his life.  He was scarcely two-and-twenty
when he lost her, who perhaps would have given him the stability he
wanted; but his tender hove for her endured through life.  It is not
improbable that it was this still abiding attachment that made him
slack in overcoming difficulties in the way of other contracts, and
that he may have hoped that his engagement to Bianca Sforza would
come to nothing, like so many others.

The most curious record of him is, however, in two books, the
materials for which he furnished, and whose composition and
illustration he superintended, Der Weise King, and Theurdank, of both
of which he is well known to be the hero.  The White, or the Wise
King, it is uncertain which, is a history of his education and
exploits, in prose.  Every alternate page has its engraving, showing
how the Young White King obtains instruction in painting,
architecture, language, and all arts and sciences, the latter
including magic--which he learns of an old woman with a long-tailed
demon sitting, like Mother Hubbard's cat, on her shoulder--and
astrology.  In the illustration of this study an extraordinary figure
of a cross within a circle appears in the sky, which probably has
some connection with his scheme of nativity, for it also appears on
the breast of Ehrenhold, his constant companion in the metrical
history of his career, under the name of Theurdank.

The poetry of Theurdank was composed by Maximilian's old writing-
master, Melchior Pfinznig; but the adventures were the Kaisar's own,
communicated by himself, and he superintended the wood-cuts.  The
name is explained to mean "craving glory,"--Gloriaememor.  The
Germans laugh to scorn a French translator, who rendered it
"Chermerci."  It was annotated very soon after its publication, and
each exploit explained and accounted for.  It is remarkable and
touching in a man who married at eighteen, and was a widower at
twenty-two, that, in both books, the happy union with his lady love
is placed at the end--not at the beginning of the book; and in
Theurdank, at least, the eternal reunion is clearly meant.

In this curious book, Konig Romreich, by whom every contemporary
understood poor Charles of Burgundy--thus posthumously made King of
Rome by Maximilian, as the only honour in his power, betroths his
daughter Ehrenreich (rich in honour) to the Ritter Theurdank.  Soon
after, by a most mild version of Duke Charles's frightful end, Konig
Romreich is seen on his back dying in a garden, and Ehrenreich (as
Mary really did) despatches a ring to summon her betrothed.

But here Theurdank returns for answer that he means first to win
honour by his exploits, and sets out with his comrade, Ehrenhold, in
search thereof.  Ehrenhold never appears of the smallest use to him
in any of the dire adventures into which he falls, but only stands
complacently by, and in effect may represent Fame, or perhaps that
literary sage whom Don Quixote always supposed to be at hand to
record his deeds of prowess.

Next we are presented with the German impersonation of Satan as a
wise old magician, only with claws instead of feet, commissioning his
three captains (hauptleutern), Furwitz, Umfallo, and Neidelhard, to
beset and ruin Theurdank.  They are interpreted as the dangers of
youth, middle life, and old age--Rashness, Disaster, and Distress (or
Envy).  One at a time they encounter him,--not once, but again and
again; and he has ranged under each head, in entire contempt of real
order of time, the perils he thinks owing to each foe.  Furwitz most
justly gets the credit of Maximilian's perils on the steeple of Ulm,
though, unfortunately, the artist has represented the daring climber
as standing not much above the shoulders of Furwitz and Ehrenhold;
and although the annotation tells us that his "hinder half foot"
overhung the scaffold, the danger in the print is not appalling.
Furwitz likewise inveigles him into putting the point (schnabel) of
his shoe into the wheel of a mill for turning stone balls, where he
certainly hardly deserved to lose nothing but the beak of his shoe.
This enemy also brings him into numerous unpleasant predicaments on
precipices, where he hangs by one hand; while the chamois stand
delighted on every available peak, Furwitz grins malevolently, and
Ehrenhold stands pointing at him over his shoulder.  Time and place
are given in the notes for all these escapes.  After some twenty
adventures Furwitz is beaten off, and Umfallo tries his powers.  Here
the misadventures do not involve so much folly on the hero's part--
though, to be sure, he ventures into a lion's den unarmed, and has to
beat off the inmates with a shovel.  But the other adventures are
more rational.  He catches a jester--of admirably foolish expression-
-putting a match to a powder-magazine; he is wonderfully preserved in
mountain avalanches and hurricanes; reins up his horse on the verge
of an abyss; falls through ice in Holland and shows nothing but his
head above it; cures himself of a fever by draughts of water, to the
great disgust of his physicians, and escapes a fire bursting out of a
tall stove.

Neidelhard brings his real battles and perils.  From this last he is
in danger of shipwreck, of assassination, of poison, in single
combat, or in battle; tumults of the people beset him; he is
imprisoned as at Ghent.  But finally Neidelhard is beaten back; and
the hero is presented to Ehrenreich.  Ehrenhold recounts his
triumphs, and accuses the three captains.  One is hung, another
beheaded, the third thrown headlong from a tower, and a guardian
angel then summons Theurdank to his union with his Queen.  No doubt
this reunion was the life-dream of the harassed, busy, inconsistent
man, who flashed through the turmoils of the early sixteenth century.

The adventures of Maximilian which have been adverted to in the story
are all to be found in Theurdank, and in his early life he was
probably the brilliant eager person we have tried in some degree to
describe.  In his latter years it is well known that he was much
struck by Luther's arguments; and, indeed, he had long been conscious
of need of Church reform, though his plans took the grotesque form of
getting himself made Pope, and taking all into his own hands.

Perhaps it was unwise to have ever so faintly sketched Ebbo's career
through the ensuing troubles; but the history of the star and of the
spark in the stubble seemed to need completion; and the working out
of the character of the survivor was unfinished till his course had
been thought over from the dawn of the Wittenberg teaching, which
must have seemed no novelty to an heir of the doctrine of Tauler, and
of the veritably Catholic divines of old times.  The idea is of the
supposed course of a thoughtful, refined, conscientious man through
the earlier times of the Reformation, glad of the hope of cleansing
the Church, but hoping to cleanse, not to break away from her--a hope
that Luther himself long cherished, and which was not entirely
frustrated till the re-assembly at Trent in the next generation.
Justice has never been done to the men who feared to loose their hold
on the Church Catholic as the one body to which the promises were
made.  Their loyalty has been treated as blindness, timidity, or
superstition; but that there were many such persons, and those among
the very highest minds of their time, no one can have any doubt after
reading such lives as those of Friedrich the Wise of Saxony, of
Erasmus, of Vittoria Colonna, or of Cardinal Giustiniani.

April 9, 1836.



CHAPTER I:  MASTER GOTTFRIED'S WORKSHOP



The upper lattices of a tall, narrow window were open, and admitted
the view, of first some richly-tinted vine leaves and purpling
grapes, then, in dazzling freshness of new white stone, the lacework
fabric of a half-built minster spire, with a mason's crane on the
summit, bending as though craving for a further supply of materials;
and beyond, peeping through every crevice of the exquisite open
fretwork, was the intensely blue sky of early autumn.

The lower longer panes of the window were closed, and the glass,
divided into circles and quarrels, made the scene less distinct; but
still the huge stone tower was traceable, and, farther off, the slope
of a gently-rising hill, clothed with vineyards blushing into autumn
richness.  Below, the view was closed by the gray wall of a court-
yard, laden with fruit-trees in full bearing, and inclosing paved
paths that radiated from a central fountain, and left spaces between,
where a few summer flowers still lingered, and the remains of others
showed what their past glory had been.

The interior of the room was wainscoted, the floor paved with bright
red and cream-coloured tiles, and the tall stove in one corner
decorated with the same.  The eastern end of the apartment was
adorned with an exquisite small group carved in oak, representing the
carpenter's shop at Nazareth, with the Holy Child instructed by
Joseph in the use of tools, and the Mother sitting with her book,
"pondering these things in her heart."  All around were blocks of
wood and carvings in varying states of progress--some scarcely shaped
out, and others in perfect completion.  And the subjects were equally
various.  Here was an adoring angel with folded wings, clasped hands,
and rapt face; here a majestic head of an apostle or prophet; here a
lovely virgin saint, seeming to play smilingly with the instrument of
her martyrdom; here a grotesque miserere group, illustrating a fairy
tale, or caricaturing a popular fable here a beauteous festoon of
flowers and fruit, emulating nature in all save colour; and on the
work-table itself, growing under the master's hand, was a long
wreath, entirely composed of leaves and seed-vessels in their quaint
and beauteous forms--the heart-shaped shepherd's purse, the mask-like
skull-cap, and the crowned urn of the henbane.  The starred cap of
the poppy was actually being shaped under the tool, copied from a
green capsule, surmounted with purple velvety rays, which, together
with its rough and wavy leaf, was held in the hand of a young maiden
who knelt by the table, watching the work with eager interest.

She was not a beautiful girl--not one of those whose "bright eyes
rain influence, and judge the prize."  She was too small, too slight,
too retiring for such a position.  If there was something lily-like
in her drooping grace, it was not the queen-lily of the garden that
she resembled, but the retiring lily of the valley--so purely,
transparently white was her skin, scarcely tinted by a roseate blush
on the cheek, so tender and modest the whole effect of her slender
figure, and the soft, downcast, pensive brown eyes, utterly
dissimilar in hue from those of all her friends and kindred, except
perhaps the bright, quick ones of her uncle, the master-carver.
Otherwise, his portly form, open visage, and good-natured
stateliness, as well as his furred cap and gold chain, were
thoroughly those of the German burgomaster of the fifteenth century;
but those glittering black eyes had not ceased to betray their
French, or rather Walloon, origin, though for several generations
back the family had been settled at Ulm.  Perhaps, too, it was
Walloon quickness and readiness of wit that had made them, so soon as
they became affiliated, so prominent in all the councils of the good
free city, and so noted for excellence in art and learning.  Indeed
the present head of the family, Master Gottfried Sorel, was so much
esteemed for his learning that he had once had serious thoughts of
terming himself Magister Gothofredus Oxalicus, and might have carried
it out but for the very decided objections of his wife, Dame Johanna,
and his little niece, Christina, to being dubbed by any such surname.

Master Gottfried had had a scapegrace younger brother named Hugh, who
had scorned both books and tools, had been the plague of the
workshop, and, instead of coming back from his wandering year of
improvement, had joined a band of roving Lanzknechts.  No more had
been heard of him for a dozen or fifteen years, when he suddenly
arrived at the paternal mansion at Ulm, half dead with intermittent
fever, and with a young, broken-hearted, and nearly expiring wife,
his spoil in his Italian campaigns.  His rude affection had utterly
failed to console her for her desolated home and slaughtered kindred,
and it had so soon turned to brutality that, when brought to
comparative peace and rest in his brother's home, there was nothing
left for the poor Italian but to lie down and die, commending her
babe in broken German to Hausfrau Johanna, and blessing Master
Gottfried for his flowing Latin assurances that the child should be
to them even as the little maiden who was lying in the God's acre
upon the hillside

And verily the little Christina had been a precious gift to the
bereaved couple.  Her father had no sooner recovered than he returned
to his roving life, and, except for a report that he had been seen
among the retainers of one of the robber barons of the Swabian Alps,
nothing had been heard of him; and Master Gottfried only hoped to be
spared the actual pain and scandal of knowing when his eyes were
blinded and his head swept off at a blow, or when he was tumbled
headlong into a moat, suspended from a tree, or broken on the wheel:
a choice of fates that was sure sooner or later to befall him.
Meantime, both the burgomeister and burgomeisterinn did their utmost
to forget that the gentle little girl was not their own; they set all
their hopes and joys on her, and, making her supply the place at once
of son and daughter, they bred her up in all the refinements and
accomplishments in which the free citizens of Germany took the lead
in the middle and latter part of the fifteenth century.  To aid her
aunt in all house-wifely arts, to prepare dainty food and varied
liquors, and to spin, weave, and broider, was only a part of
Christina's training; her uncle likewise set great store by her sweet
Italian voice, and caused her to be carefully taught to sing and play
on the lute, and he likewise delighted in hearing her read aloud to
him from the hereditary store of MSS. and from the dark volumes that
began to proceed from the press.  Nay, Master Gottfried had made
experiments in printing and wood-engraving on his own account, and
had found no head so intelligent, no hand so desirous to aid him, as
his little Christina's, who, in all that needed taste and skill
rather than strength, was worth all his prentices and journeymen
together.  Some fine bold wood-cuts had been produced by their joint
efforts; but these less important occupations had of late been set
aside by the engrossing interest of the interior fittings of the
great "Dome Kirk," which for nearly a century had been rising by the
united exertions of the burghers, without any assistance from
without.  The foundation had been laid in 1377; and at length, in the
year of grace 1472, the crown of the apse had been closed in, and
matters were so forward that Master Gottfried's stall work was
already in requisition for the choir.

"Three cubits more," he reckoned.  "Child, hast thou found me fruits
enough for the completing of this border?"

"O yes, mine uncle.  I have the wild rosehip, and the flat shield of
the moonwort, and a pea-pod, and more whose names I know not.  But
should they all be seed and fruit?"

"Yea, truly, my Stina, for this wreath shall speak of the goodly
fruits of a completed life."

"Even as that which you carved in spring told of the blossom and fair
promise of youth," returned the maiden.  "Methinks the one is the
most beautiful, as it ought to be;" then, after a little pause, and
some reckoning, "I have scarce seed-pods enough in store, uncle;
might we not seek some rarer shapes in the herb-garden of Master
Gerhard, the physician?  He, too, might tell me the names of some of
these."

"True, child; or we might ride into the country beyond the walls, and
seek them.  What, little one, wouldst thou not?"

"So we go not far," faltered Christina, colouring.

"Ha, thou hast not forgotten the fright thy companions had from the
Schlangenwald reitern when gathering Maydew?  Fear not, little
coward; if we go beyond the suburbs we will take Hans and Peter with
their halberts.  But I believe thy silly little heart can scarce be
free for enjoyment if it can fancy a Reiter within a dozen leagues of
thee."

"At your side I would not fear.  That is, I would not vex thee by my
folly, and I might forget it," replied Christina, looking down.

"My gentle child!" the old man said approvingly.  "Moreover, if our
good Raiser has his way, we shall soon be free of the reitern of
Schlangenwald, and Adlerstein, and all the rest of the mouse-trap
barons.  He is hoping to form a league of us free imperial cities
with all the more reasonable and honest nobles, to preserve the peace
of the country.  Even now a letter from him was read in the Town Hall
to that effect; and, when all are united against them, my lords-
mousers must needs become pledged to the league, or go down before
it."

"Ah! that will be well," cried Christina.  "Then will our wagons be
no longer set upon at the Debateable Ford by Schlangenwald or
Adlerstein; and our wares will come safely, and there will be wealth
enough to raise our spire!  O uncle, what a day of joy will that be
when Our Lady's great statue will be set on the summit!"

"A day that I shall scarce see, and it will be well if thou dost,"
returned her uncle, "unless the hearts of the burghers of Ulm return
to the liberality of their fathers, who devised that spire!  But what
trampling do I hear?"

There was indeed a sudden confusion in the house, and, before the
uncle and niece could rise, the door was opened by a prosperous
apple-faced dame, exclaiming in a hasty whisper, "Housefather, O
Housefather, there are a troop of reitern at the door, dismounting
already;" and, as the master came forward, brushing from his furred
vest the shavings and dust of his work, she added in a more furtive,
startled accent, "and, if I mistake not, one is thy brother!"

"He is welcome," replied Master Gottfried, in his cheery fearless
voice; "he brought us a choice gift last time he came; and it may be
he is ready to seek peace among us after his wanderings.  Come
hither, Christina, my little one; it is well to be abashed, but thou
art not a child who need fear to meet a father."

Christina's extreme timidity, however, made her pale and crimson by
turns, perhaps by the infection of anxiety from her aunt, who could
not conceal a certain dissatisfaction and alarm, as the maiden, led
on either side by her adopted parents, thus advanced from the little
studio into a handsomely-carved wooden gallery, projecting into a
great wainscoated room, with a broad carved stair leading down into
it.  Down this stair the three proceeded, and reached the stone hall
that lay beyond it, just as there entered from the trellised porch,
that covered the steps into the street, a thin wiry man, in a worn
and greasy buff suit, guarded on the breast and arms with rusty
steel, and a battered helmet with the vizor up, disclosing a weather-
beaten bronzed face, with somewhat wild dark eyes, and a huge
grizzled moustache forming a straight line over his lips.  Altogether
he was a complete model of the lawless Reiter or Lanzknecht, the
terror of Swabia, and the bugbear of Christina's imagination.  The
poor child's heart died within her as she perceived the mutual
recognition between her uncle and the new comer; and, while Master
Gottfried held out his hands with a cordial greeting of "Welcome,
home, brother Hugh," she trembled from head to foot, as she sank on
her knees, and murmured, "Your blessing, honoured father."

"Ha?  What, this is my girl?  What says she?  My blessing, eh?  There
then, thou hast it, child, such as I have to give, though they'll
tell thee at Adlerstein that I am more wont to give the other sort of
blessing!  Now, give me a kiss, girl, and let me see thee!  How now!"
as he folded her in his rough arms; "thou art a mere feather, as
slight as our sick Jungfrau herself."  And then, regarding her, as
she stood drooping, "Thou art not half the woman thy mother was--she
was stately and straight as a column, and tall withal."

"True!" replied Hausfrau Johanna, in a marked tone; "but both she and
her poor babe had been so harassed and wasted with long journeys and
hardships, that with all our care of our Christina, she has never
been strong or well-grown.  The marvel is that she lived at all."

"Our Christina is not beautiful, we know," added her uncle,
reassuringly taking her hand; "but she is a good and meek maiden."

"Well, well," returned the Lanzknecht, "she will answer the purpose
well enough, or better than if she were fair enough to set all our
fellows together by the ears for her.  Camilla, I say--no, what's her
name, Christina?--put up thy gear and be ready to start with me to-
morrow morning for Adlerstein."

"For Adlerstein?" re-echoed the housemother, in a tone of horrified
dismay; and Christina would have dropped on the floor but for her
uncle's sustaining hand, and the cheering glance with which he met
her imploring look.

"Let us come up to the gallery, and understand what you desire,
brother," said Master Gottfried, gravely.  "Fill the cup of greeting,
Hans.  Your followers shall be entertained in the hall," he added.

"Ay, ay," quoth Hugh, "I will show you reason over a goblet of the
old Rosenburg.  Is it all gone yet, brother Goetz?  No?  I reckon
there would not be the scouring of a glass left of it in a week if it
were at Adlerstein."

So saying, the trooper crossed the lower room, which contained a huge
tiled baking oven, various brilliantly-burnished cooking utensils,
and a great carved cupboard like a wooden bedstead, and, passing the
door of the bathroom, clanked up the oaken stairs to the gallery, the
reception-room of the house.  It had tapestry hangings to the wall,
and cushions both to the carved chairs and deep windows, which looked
out into the street, the whole storey projecting into close proximity
with the corresponding apartment of the Syndic Moritz, the goldsmith
on the opposite side.  An oaken table stood in the centre, and the
gallery was adorned with a dresser, displaying not only bright
pewter, but goblets and drinking cups of beautifully-shaped and
coloured glass, and saltcellars, tankards, &c. of gold and silver.

"Just as it was in the old man's time," said the soldier, throwing
himself into the housefather's chair.  "A handful of Lanzknechts
would make short work with your pots and pans, good sister Johanna."

"Heaven forbid!" said poor Johanna under her breath.  "Much good they
do you, up in a row there, making you a slave to furbishing them.
There's more sense in a chair like this--that does rest a man's
bones.  Here, Camilla, girl, unlace my helmet!  What, know'st not
how?  What is a woman made for but to let a soldier free of his
trappings?  Thou hast done it!  There!  Now my boots," stretching out
his legs.

"Hans shall draw off your boots, fair brother," began the dame; but
poor Christina, the more anxious to propitiate him in little things,
because of the horror and dread with which his main purpose inspired
her, was already on her knees, pulling with her small quivering hands
at the long steel-guarded boot--a task to which she would have been
utterly inadequate, but for some lazy assistance from her father's
other foot.  She further brought a pair of her uncle's furred
slippers, while Reiter Hugh proceeded to dangle one of the boots in
the air, expatiating on its frail condition, and expressing his
intention of getting a new pair from Master Matthias, the sutor, ere
he should leave Ulm on the morrow.  Then, again, came the dreaded
subject; his daughter must go with him.

"What would you with Christina, brother?" gravely asked Master
Gottfried, seating himself on the opposite side of the stove, while
out of sight the frightened girl herself knelt on the floor, her head
on her aunt's knees, trying to derive comfort from Dame Johanna's
clasping hands, and vehement murmurs that they would not let their
child be taken from them.  Alas! these assurances were little in
accordance with Hugh's rough reply, "And what is it to you what I do
with mine own?"

"Only this, that, having bred her up as my child and intended
heiress, I might have some voice."

"Oh! in choosing her mate!  Some mincing artificer, I trow, fiddling
away with wood and wire to make gauds for the fair-day!  Hast got him
here?  If I like him, and she likes him, I'll bring her back when her
work is done."

"There is no such person as yet in the case," said Gottfried.
"Christina is not yet seventeen, and I would take my time to find an
honest, pious burgher, who will value this precious jewel of mine."

"And let her polish his flagons to the end of her days," laughed Hugh
grimly, but manifestly somewhat influenced by the notion of his
brother's wealth.  "What, hast no child of thine own?" he added.

"None, save in Paradise," answered Gottfried, crossing himself.  "And
thus, if Christina should remain with me, and be such as I would have
her, then, brother, my wealth, after myself and my good housewife,
shall be hers, with due provision for thee, if thou shouldst weary of
thy wild life.  Otherwise," he added, looking down, and speaking in
an under tone, "my poor savings should go to the completion of the
Dome Kirk."

"And who told thee, Goetz, that I would do ought with the girl that
should hinder her from being the very same fat, sourkrout-cooking,
pewter-scrubbing housewife of thy mind's eye?"

"I have heard nothing of thy designs as yet, brother Hugh, save that
thou wouldst take her to Adlerstein, which men greatly belie if it be
not a nest of robbers."

"Aha! thou hast heard of Adlerstein!  We have made the backs of your
jolly merchants tingle as well as they could through their well-lined
doublets!  Ulm knows of Adlerstein, and the Debateable Ford!"

"It knows little to its credit," said Gottfried, gravely; "and it
knows also that the Emperor is about to make a combination against
all the Swabian robber-holds, and that such as join not in it will
fare the worse."

"Let Kaiser Fritz catch his bear ere he sells its hide!  He has never
tried to mount the Eagle's Ladder!  Why, man, Adlerstein might be
held against five hundred men by sister Johanna with her rock and
spindle!  'Tis a free barony, Master Gottfried, I tell thee--has
never sworn allegiance to Kaiser or Duke of Swabia either!  Freiherr
Eberhard is as much a king on his own rock as Kaiser Fritz ever was
of the Romans, and more too, for I never could find out that they
thought much of our king at Rome; and, as to gainsaying our old
Freiherr, one might as well leap over the abyss at once."

"Yes, those old free barons are pitiless tyrants," said Gottfried,
"and I scarce think I can understand thee aright when I hear thee say
thou wouldst carry thy daughter to such an abode."

"It is the Freiherr's command," returned Hugh.  "Look you, they have
had wondrous ill-luck with their children; the Freiherrinn Kunigunde
has had a dozen at least, and only two are alive, my young Freiherr
and my young Lady Ermentrude; and no wonder, you would say, if you
could see the gracious Freiherrinn, for surely Dame Holda made a
blunder when she fished her out of the fountain woman instead of man.
She is Adlerstein herself by birth, married her cousin, and is
prouder and more dour than our old Freiherr himself--fitter far to
handle shield than swaddled babe.  And now our Jungfrau has fallen
into a pining waste, that 'tis a pity to see how her cheeks have
fallen away, and how she mopes and fades.  Now, the old Freiherr and
her brother, they both dote on her, and would do anything for her.
They thought she was bewitched, so we took old Mother Ilsebill and
tried her with the ordeal of water; but, look you, she sank as
innocent as a puppy dog, and Ursel was at fault to fix on any one
else.  Then one day, when I looked into the chamber, I saw the poor
maiden sitting, with her head hanging down, as if 'twas too heavy for
her, on a high-backed chair, no rest for her feet, and the wind
blowing keen all round her, and nothing to taste but scorched beef,
or black bread and sour wine, and her mother rating her for foolish
fancies that gave trouble.  And, when my young Freiherr was bemoaning
himself that we could not hear of a Jew physician passing our way to
catch and bring up to cure her, I said to him at last that no doctor
could do for her what gentle tendance and nursing would, for what the
poor maiden needed was to be cosseted and laid down softly, and fed
with broths and possets, and all that women know how to do with one
another.  A proper scowl and hard words I got from my gracious Lady,
for wanting to put burgher softness into an Adlerstein; but my old
lord and his son opened on the scent at once.  'Thou hast a
daughter?' quoth the Freiherr.  'So please your gracious lordship,'
quoth I; 'that is, if she still lives, for I left her a puny infant.'
'Well,' said my lord, 'if thou wilt bring her here, and her care
restores my daughter to health and strength, then will I make thee my
body squire, with a right to a fourth part of all the spoil, and feed
for two horses in my stable.'  And young Freiherr Eberhard gave his
word upon it."

Gottfried suggested that a sick nurse was the person required rather
than a child like Christina; but, as Hugh truly observed, no nurse
would voluntarily go to Adlerstein, and it was no use to wait for the
hopes of capturing one by raid or foray.  His daughter was at his own
disposal, and her services would be repaid by personal advantages to
himself which he was not disposed to forego; in effect these were the
only means that the baron had of requiting any attendance upon his
daughter.

The citizens of old Germany had the strongest and most stringent
ideas of parental authority, and regarded daughters as absolute
chattels of their father; and Master Gottfried Sorel, though he alone
had done the part of a parent to his niece, felt entirely unable to
withstand the nearer claim, except by representations; and these fell
utterly disregarded, as in truth every counsel had hitherto done,
upon the ears of Reiter Hugh, ever since he had emerged from his
swaddling clothes.  The plentiful supper, full cup of wine, the
confections, the soft chair, together perhaps with his brother's
grave speech, soon, however, had the effect of sending him into a
doze, whence he started to accept civilly the proposal of being
installed in the stranger's room, where he was speedily snoring
between two feather beds.

Then there could be freedom of speech in the gallery, where the uncle
and aunt held anxious counsel over the poor little dark-tressed head
that still lay upon good Johanna's knees.  The dame was indignant and
resolute:  "Take the child back with him into a very nest of
robbers!--her own innocent dove whom they had shielded from all evil
like a very nun in a cloister!  She should as soon think of yielding
her up to be borne off by the great Satan himself with his horns and
hoofs."

"Hugh is her father, housewife," said the master-carver.

"The right of parents is with those that have done the duty of
parents," returned Johanna.  "What said the kid in the fable to the
goat that claimed her from the sheep that bred her up?  I am ashamed
of you, housefather, for not better loving your own niece."

"Heaven knows how I love her," said Gottfried, as the sweet face was
raised up to him with a look acquitting him of the charge, and he
bent to smooth back the silken hair, and kiss the ivory brow; "but
Heaven also knows that I see no means of withholding her from one
whose claim is closer than my own--none save one; and to that even
thou, housemother, wouldst not have me resort."

"What is it?" asked the dame, sharply, yet with some fear.

"To denounce him to the burgomasters as one of the Adlerstein
retainers who robbed Philipp der Schmidt, and have him fast laid by
the heels."

Christina shuddered, and Dame Johanna herself recoiled; but presently
exclaimed, "Nay, you could not do that, good man, but wherefore not
threaten him therewith?  Stand at his bedside in early dawn, and tell
him that, if he be not off ere daylight with both his cut-throats,
the halberdiers will be upon him."

"Threaten what I neither could nor would perform, mother?  That were
a shrewish resource."

"Yet would it save the child," muttered Johanna.  But, in the
meantime, Christina was rising from the floor, and stood before them
with loose hair, tearful eyes, and wet, flushed cheeks.  "It must be
thus," she said, in a low, but not unsteady voice.  "I can bear it
better since I have heard of the poor young lady, sick and with none
to care for her.  I will go with my father; it is my duty.  I will do
my best; but oh! uncle, so work with him that he may bring me back
again."

"This from thee, Stina!" exclaimed her aunt; "from thee who art sick
for fear of a lanzknecht!"

"The saints will be with me, and you will pray for me," said
Christina, still trembling.

"I tell thee, child, thou knowst not what these vile dens are.
Heaven forfend thou shouldst!" exclaimed her aunt.  "Go only to
Father Balthazar, housefather, and see if he doth not call it a
sending of a lamb among wolves."

"Mind'st thou the carving I did for Father Balthazar's own oratory?"
replied Master Gottfried.

"I talk not of carving!  I talk of our child!" said the dame,
petulantly.

"Ut agnus inter lupos," softly said Gottfried, looking tenderly,
though sadly, at his niece, who not only understood the quotation,
but well remembered the carving of the cross-marked lamb going forth
from its fold among the howling wolves.

"Alas!  I am not an apostle," said she.

"Nay, but, in the path of duty, 'tis the same hand that sends thee
forth," answered her uncle, "and the same will guard thee."

"Duty, indeed!" exclaimed Johanna.  "As if any duty could lead that
silly helpless child among that herd of evil men, and women yet
worse, with a good-for-nothing father, who would sell her for a good
horse to the first dissolute Junker who fell in his way."

"I will take care that he knows it is worth his while to restore her
safe to us.  Nor do I think so ill of Hugh as thou dost, mother.
And, for the rest, Heaven and the saints and her own discretion must
be her guard till she shall return to us."

"How can Heaven be expected to protect her when you are flying in its
face by not taking counsel with Father Balthazar?"

"That shalt thou do," replied Gottfried, readily, secure that Father
Balthazar would see the matter in the same light as himself, and
tranquillize the good woman.  It was not yet so late but that a
servant could be despatched with a request that Father Balthazar, who
lived not many houses off in the same street, would favour the
Burgomeisterinn Sorel by coming to speak with her.  In a few minutes
he appeared,--an aged man, with a sensible face, of the fresh pure
bloom preserved by a temperate life.  He was a secular parish-priest,
and, as well as his friend Master Gottfried, held greatly by the
views left by the famous Strasburg preacher, Master John Tauler.
After the good housemother had, in strong terms, laid the case before
him, she expected a trenchant decision on her own side, but, to her
surprise and disappointment, he declared that Master Gottfried was
right, and that, unless Hugh Sorel demanded anything absolutely
sinful of his daughter, it was needful that she should submit.  He
repeated, in stronger terms, the assurance that she would be
protected in the endeavour to do right, and the Divine promises which
he quoted from the Latin Scriptures gave some comfort to the niece,
who understood them, while they impressed the aunt, who did not.
There was always the hope that, whether the young lady died or
recovered, the conclusion of her illness would be the term of
Christina's stay at Adlerstein, and with this trust Johanna must
content herself.  The priest took leave, after appointing with
Christina to meet her in the confessional early in the morning before
mass; and half the night was spent by the aunt and niece in preparing
Christina's wardrobe for her sudden journey.

Many a tear was shed over the tokens of the little services she was
wont to render, her half-done works, and pleasant studies so suddenly
broken off, and all the time Hausfrau Johanna was running on with a
lecture on the diligent preservation of her maiden discretion, with
plentiful warnings against swaggering men-at-arms, drunken
lanzknechts, and, above all, against young barons, who most assuredly
could mean no good by any burgher maiden.  The good aunt blessed the
saints that her Stina was likely only to be lovely in affectionate
home eyes; but, for that matter, idle men, shut up in a castle, with
nothing but mischief to think of, would be dangerous to Little Three
Eyes herself, and Christina had best never stir a yard from her
lady's chair, when forced to meet them.  All this was interspersed
with motherly advice how to treat the sick lady, and receipts for
cordials and possets; for Johanna began to regard the case as a sort
of second-hand one of her own.  Nay, she even turned it over in her
mind whether she should not offer herself as the Lady Ermentrude's
sick-nurse, as being a less dangerous commodity than her little
niece:  but fears for the well-being of the master-carver, and his
Wirthschaft, and still more the notion of gossip Gertrude Grundt
hearing that she had ridden off with a wild lanzknecht, made her at
once reject the plan, without even mentioning it to her husband or
his niece.

By the time Hugh Sorel rolled out from between his feather beds, and
was about to don his greasy buff, a handsome new suit, finished point
device, and a pair of huge boots to correspond, had been laid by his
bedside.

"Ho, ho!  Master Goetz," said he, as he stumbled into the Stube, "I
see thy game.  Thou wouldst make it worth my while to visit the
father-house at Ulm?"

"It shall be worth thy while, indeed, if thou bringest me back my
white dove," was Gottfried's answer.

"And how if I bring her back with a strapping reiter son-in-law?"
laughed Hugh.  "What welcome should the fellow receive?"

"That would depend on what he might be," replied Gottfried; and Hugh,
his love of tormenting a little allayed by satisfaction in his buff
suit, and by an eye to a heavy purse that lay by his brother's hand
on the table, added, "Little fear of that.  Our fellows would look
for lustier brides than yon little pale face.  'Tis whiter than ever
this morning,--but no tears.  That is my brave girl."

"Yes, father, I am ready to do your bidding," replied Christina,
meekly.

"That is well, child.  Mark me, no tears.  Thy mother wept day and
night, and, when she had wept out her tears, she was sullen, when I
would have been friendly towards her.  It was the worse for her.
But, so long as thou art good daughter to me, thou shalt find me good
father to thee;" and for a moment there was a kindliness in his eye
which made it sufficiently like that of his brother to give some
consolation to the shrinking heart that he was rending from all it
loved; and she steadied her voice for another gentle profession of
obedience, for which she felt strengthened by the morning's orisons.

"Well said, child.  Now canst sit on old Nibelung's croup?  His back-
bone is somewhat sharper than if he had battened in a citizen's
stall; but, if thine aunt can find thee some sort of pillion, I'll
promise thee the best ride thou hast had since we came from
Innspruck, ere thou canst remember."

"Christina has her own mule," replied her uncle, "without troubling
Nibelung to carry double."

"Ho! her own!  An overfed burgomaster sort of a beast, that will turn
restive at the first sight of the Eagle's Ladder!  However, he may
carry her so far, and, if we cannot get him up the mountain, I shall
know what to do with him," he muttered to himself.

But Hugh, like many a gentleman after him, was recusant at the sight
of his daughter's luggage; and yet it only loaded one sumpter mule,
besides forming a few bundles which could be easily bestowed upon the
saddles of his two knappen, while her lute hung by a silken string on
her arm.  Both she and her aunt thought she had been extremely
moderate; but his cry was, What could she want with so much?  Her
mother had never been allowed more than would go into a pair of
saddle-bags; and his own Jungfrau--she had never seen so much gear
together in her life; he would be laughed to scorn for his
presumption in bringing such a fine lady into the castle; it would be
well if Freiherr Eberhard's bride brought half as much.

Still he had a certain pride in it--he was, after all, by birth and
breeding a burgher--and there had been evidently a softening and
civilizing influence in the night spent beneath his paternal roof,
and old habits, and perhaps likewise in the submission he had met
with from his daughter.  The attendants, too, who had been pleased
with their quarters, readily undertook to carry their share of the
burthen, and, though he growled and muttered a little, he at length
was won over to consent, chiefly, as it seemed, by Christina's
obliging readiness to leave behind the bundle that contained her
holiday kirtle.

He had been spared all needless irritation.  Before his waking,
Christina had been at the priest's cell, and had received his last
blessings and counsels, and she had, on the way back, exchanged her
farewells and tears with her two dearest friends, Barbara Schmidt,
and Regina Grundt, confiding to the former her cage of doves, and to
the latter the myrtle, which, like every German maiden, she cherished
in her window, to supply her future bridal wreath.  Now pale as
death, but so resolutely composed as to be almost disappointing to
her demonstrative aunt, she quietly went through her home partings;
while Hausfrau Johanna adjured her father by all that was sacred to
be a true guardian and protector of the child, and he could not
forbear from a few tormenting auguries about the lanzknecht son-in-
law.  Their effect was to make the good dame more passionate in her
embraces and admonitions to Christina to take care of herself.  She
would have a mass said every day that Heaven might have a care of
her!

Master Gottfried was going to ride as far as the confines of the free
city's territory, and his round, sleek, cream-coloured