 palfrey, used
to ambling in civic processions, was as great a contrast to raw-
boned, wild-eyed Nibelung, all dappled with misty grey, as was the
stately, substantial burgher to his lean, hungry-looking brother, or
Dame Johanna's dignified, curled, white poodle, which was forcibly
withheld from following Christina, to the coarse-bristled, wolfish-
looking hound who glared at the household pet with angry and
contemptuous eyes, and made poor Christina's heart throb with terror
whenever it bounded near her.

Close to her uncle she kept, as beneath the trellised porches that
came down from the projecting gables of the burghers' houses many a
well-known face gazed and nodded, as they took their way through the
crooked streets, many a beggar or poor widow waved her a blessing.
Out into the market-place, with its clear fountain adorned with
arches and statues, past the rising Dome Kirk, where the swarms of
workmen unbonneted to the master-carver, and the reiter paused with
an irreverent sneer at the small progress made since he could first
remember the building.  How poor little Christina's soul clung to
every cusp of the lacework spire, every arch of the window, each of
which she had hailed as an achievement!  The tears had well-nigh
blinded her in a gush of feeling that came on her unawares, and her
mule had his own way as he carried her under the arch of the tall and
beautifully-sculptured bridge tower, and over the noble bridge across
the Danube.

Her uncle spoke much, low and earnestly, to his brother.  She knew it
was in commendation of her to his care, and an endeavour to impress
him with a sense of the kind of protection she would require, and she
kept out of earshot.  It was enough for her to see her uncle still,
and feel that his tenderness was with her, and around her.  But at
last he drew his rein.  "And now, my little one, the daughter of my
heart, I must bid thee farewell," he said.

Christina could not be restrained from springing from her mule, and
kneeling on the grass to receive his blessing, her face hidden in her
hands, that her father might not see her tears.

"The good God bless thee, my child," said Gottfried, who seldom
invoked the saints; "bless thee, and bring thee back in His own good
time.  Thou hast been a good child to us; be so to thine own father.
Do thy work, and come back to us again."

The tears rained down his cheeks, as Christina's head lay on his
bosom, and then with a last kiss he lifted her again on her mule,
mounted his horse, and turned back to the city, with his servant.

Hugh was merciful enough to let his daughter gaze long after the
retreating figure ere he summoned her on.  All day they rode, at
first through meadow lands and then through more broken, open ground,
where at mid-day they halted, and dined upon the plentiful fare with
which the housemother had provided them, over which Hugh smacked his
lips, and owned that they did live well in the old town!  Could
Christina make such sausages?

"Not as well as my aunt."

"Well, do thy best, and thou wilt win favour with the baron."

The evening began to advance, and Christina was very weary, as the
purple mountains that she had long watched with a mixture of fear and
hope began to look more distinct, and the ground was often in abrupt
ascents.  Her father, without giving space for complaints, hurried
her on.  He must reach the Debateable Ford ere dark.  It was,
however, twilight when they came to an open space, where, at the foot
of thickly forest-clad rising ground, lay an expanse of turf and rich
grass, through which a stream made its way, standing in a wide
tranquil pool as if to rest after its rough course from the
mountains.  Above rose, like a dark wall, crag upon crag, peak on
peak, in purple masses, blending with the sky; and Hugh, pointing
upwards to a turreted point, apparently close above their heads,
where a star of light was burning, told her that there was
Adlerstein, and this was the Debateable Ford.

In fact, as he explained, while splashing through the shallow
expanse, the stream had changed its course.  It was the boundary
between the lands of Schlangenwald and Adlerstein, but it had within
the last sixty years burst forth in a flood, and had then declined to
return to its own bed, but had flowed in a fresh channel to the right
of the former one.  The Freiherren von Adlerstein claimed the ground
to the old channel, the Graffen von Schlangenwald held that the river
was the landmark; and the dispute had a greater importance than
seemed explained from the worth of the rushy space of ground in
question, for this was the passage of the Italian merchants on their
way from Constance, and every load that was overthrown in the river
was regarded as the lawful prey of the noble on whose banks the
catastrophe befell.

Any freight of goods was anxiously watched by both nobles, and it was
not their fault if no disaster befell the travellers.  Hugh talked of
the Schlangenwald marauders with the bitterness of a deadly feud, but
manifestly did not breathe freely till his whole convoy were safe
across both the wet and the dry channel.

Christina supposed they should now ascend to the castle; but her
father laughed, saying that the castle was not such a step off as she
fancied, and that they must have daylight for the Eagle's Stairs.  He
led the way through the trees, up ground that she thought mountain
already, and finally arrived at a miserable little hut, which served
the purpose of an inn.

He was received there with much obsequiousness, and was plainly a
great authority there.  Christina, weary and frightened, descended
from her mule, and was put under the protection of a wild, rough-
looking peasant woman, who stared at her like something from another
world, but at length showed her a nook behind a mud partition, where
she could spread her mantle, and at least lie down, and tell her
beads unseen, if she could not sleep in the stifling, smoky
atmosphere, amid the sounds of carousal among her father and his
fellows.

The great hound came up and smelt to her.  His outline was so-
wolfish, that she had nearly screamed:  but, more in terror at the
men who might have helped her than even at the beast, she tried to
smooth him with her trembling hand, whispered his name of "Festhold,"
and found him licking her hand, and wagging his long rough tail.  And
he finally lay down at her feet, as though to protect her.

"Is it a sign that good angels will not let me be hurt?" she thought,
and, wearied out, she slept.



CHAPTER II:  THE EYRIE



Christina Sorel awoke to a scene most unlike that which had been wont
to meet her eyes in her own little wainscoted chamber high in the
gabled front of her uncle's house.  It was a time when the imperial
free towns of Germany had advanced nearly as far as those of Italy in
civilization, and had reached a point whence they retrograded
grievously during the Thirty Years' War, even to an extent that they
have never entirely recovered.  The country immediately around them
shared the benefits of their civilization, and the free peasant-
proprietors lived in great ease and prosperity, in beautiful and
picturesque farmsteads, enjoying a careless abundance, and keeping
numerous rural or religious feasts, where old Teutonic mythological
observances had received a Christian colouring and adaptation.

In the mountains, or around the castles, it was usually very
different.  The elective constitution of the empire, the frequent
change of dynasty, the many disputed successions, had combined to
render the sovereign authority uncertain and feeble, and it was
seldom really felt save in the hereditary dominions of the Kaiser for
the time being.  Thus, while the cities advanced in the power of
self-government, and the education it conveyed, the nobles,
especially those whose abodes were not easily accessible, were often
practically under no government at all, and felt themselves
accountable to no man.  The old wild freedom of the Suevi, and other
Teutonic tribes, still technically, and in many cases practically,
existed.  The Heretogen, Heerzogen, or, as we call them, Dukes, had
indeed accepted employment from the Kaiser as his generals, and had
received rewards from him; the Gerefen, or Graffen, of all kinds were
his judges, the titles of both being proofs of their holding
commissions from, and being thus dependent on, the court.  But the
Freiherren, a word very inadequately represented by our French term
of baron, were absolutely free, "never in bondage to any man,"
holding their own, and owing no duty, no office; poorer, because
unendowed by the royal authority, but holding themselves infinitely
higher, than the pensioners of the court.  Left behind, however, by
their neighbours, who did their part by society, and advanced with
it, the Freiherren had been for the most part obliged to give up
their independence and fall into the system, but so far in the rear,
that they ranked, like the barons of France and England, as the last
order of nobility.

Still, however, in the wilder and more mountainous parts of the
country, some of the old families of unreduced, truly free Freiherren
lingered, their hand against every man, every man's hand against
them, and ever becoming more savage, both positively and still more
proportionately, as their isolation and the general progress around
them became greater.  The House of Austria, by gradually absorbing
hereditary states into its own possessions, was, however, in the
fifteenth century, acquiring a preponderance that rendered its
possession of the imperial throne almost a matter of inheritance, and
moreover rendered the supreme power far more effective than it had
ever previously been.  Freidrich III. a man still in full vigour, and
with an able and enterprising son already elected to the succession,
was making his rule felt, and it was fast becoming apparent that the
days of the independent baronies were numbered, and that the only
choice that would soon be left them would be between making terms and
being forcibly reduced.  Von Adlerstein was one of the oldest of
these free families.  If the lords of the Eagle's Stone had ever
followed the great Konrads and Freidrichs of Swabia in their imperial
days, their descendants had taken care to forget the weakness, and
believed themselves absolutely free from all allegiance.

And the wildness of their territory was what might be expected from
their hostility to all outward influences.  The hostel, if it
deserved the name, was little more than a charcoal-burner's hut,
hidden in the woods at the foot of the mountain, serving as a
halting-place for the Freiherren's retainers ere they attempted the
ascent.  The inhabitants were allowed to ply their trade of charring
wood in the forest on condition of supplying the castle with
charcoal, and of affording a lodging to the followers on occasions
like the present.

Grimy, half-clad, and brawny, with the whites of his eyes gleaming
out of his black face, Jobst the Kohler startled Christina terribly
when she came into the outer room, and met him returning from his
night's work, with his long stoking-pole in his hand.  Her father
shouted with laughter at her alarm.

"Thou thinkest thyself in the land of the kobolds and dwarfs, my
girl!  Never mind, thou wilt see worse than honest Jobst before thou
hast done.  Now, eat a morsel and be ready--mountain air will make
thee hungry ere thou art at the castle.  And, hark thee, Jobst, thou
must give stable-room to yon sumpter-mule for the present, and let
some of my daughter's gear lie in the shed."

"O father!" exclaimed Christina, in dismay.

"We'll bring it up, child, by piecemeal," he said in a low voice, "as
we can; but if such a freight came to the castle at once, my lady
would have her claws on it, and little more wouldst thou ever see
thereof.  Moreover, I shall have enough to do to look after thee up
the ascent, without another of these city-bred beasts."

"I hope the poor mule will be well cared for.  I can pay for--" began
Christina; but her father squeezed her arm, and drowned her soft
voice in his loud tones.

"Jobst will take care of the beast, as belonging to me.  Woe betide
him, if I find it the worse!"--and his added imprecations seemed
unnecessary, so earnest were the asseverations of both the man and
his wife that the animal should be well cared for.

"Look you, Christina," said Hugh Sorel, as soon as he had placed her
on her mule, and led her out of hearing, "if thou hast any gold about
thee, let it be the last thing thou ownest to any living creature up
there."  Then, as she was about to speak--"Do not even tell me.  I
WILL not know."  The caution did not add much to Christina's comfort;
but she presently asked, "Where is thy steed, father?"

"I sent him up to the castle with the Schneiderlein and Yellow
Lorentz," answered the father.  "I shall have ado enough on foot with
thee before we are up the Ladder."

The father and daughter were meantime proceeding along a dark path
through oak and birch woods, constantly ascending, until the oak grew
stunted and disappeared, and the opening glades showed steep, stony,
torrent-furrowed ramparts of hillside above them, looking to
Christina's eyes as if she were set to climb up the cathedral side
like a snail or a fly.  She quite gasped for breath at the very
sight, and was told in return to wait and see what she would yet say
to the Adlerstreppe, or Eagle's Ladder.  Poor child! she had no
raptures for romantic scenery; she knew that jagged peaks made very
pretty backgrounds in illuminations, but she had much rather have
been in the smooth meadows of the environs of Ulm.  The Danube looked
much more agreeable to her, silver-winding between its green banks,
than did the same waters leaping down with noisy voices in their
stony, worn beds to feed the river that she only knew in his grave
breadth and majesty.  Yet, alarmed as she was, there was something in
the exhilaration and elasticity of the mountain air that gave her an
entirely new sensation of enjoyment and life, and seemed to brace her
limbs and spirits for whatever might be before her; and, willing to
show herself ready to be gratified, she observed on the freshness and
sweetness of the air.

"Thou find'st it out, child?  Ay, 'tis worth all the feather-beds and
pouncet-boxes in Ulm; is it not?  That accursed Italian fever never
left me till I came up here.  A man can scarce draw breath in your
foggy meadows below there.  Now then, here is the view open.  What
think you of the Eagle's Nest?"

For, having passed beyond the region of wood they had come forth upon
the mountain-side.  A not immoderately steep slope of boggy, mossy-
looking ground covered with bilberries, cranberries, &c. and with
bare rocks here and there rising, went away above out of her ken; but
the path she was upon turned round the shoulder of the mountain, and
to the left, on a ledge of rock cut off apparently on their side by a
deep ravine, and with a sheer precipice above and below it, stood a
red stone pile, with one turret far above the rest.

"And this is Schloss Adlerstein?" she exclaimed.

"That is Schloss Adlerstein; and there shalt thou be in two hours'
time, unless the devil be more than usually busy, or thou mak'st a
fool of thyself.  If so, not Satan himself could save thee."

It was well that Christina had resolution to prevent her making a
fool of herself on the spot, for the thought of the pathway turned
her so dizzy that she could only shut her eyes, trusting that her
father did not see her terror.  Soon the turn round to the side of
the mountain was made, and the road became a mere track worn out on
the turf on the hillside, with an abyss beneath, close to the edge of
which the mule, of course, walked.

When she ventured to look again, she perceived that the ravine was
like an enormous crack open on the mountain-side, and that the stream
that formed the Debateable Ford flowed down the bottom of it.  The
ravine itself went probably all the way up the mountain, growing
shallower as it ascended higher; but here, where Christina beheld it,
it was extremely deep, and savagely desolate and bare.  She now saw
that the Eagle's Ladder was a succession of bare gigantic terraces of
rock, of which the opposite side of the ravine was composed, and on
one of which stood the castle.  It was no small mystery to her how it
had ever been built, or how she was ever to get there.  She saw in
the opening of the ravine the green meadows and woods far below; and,
when her father pointed out to her the Debateable Ford, apparently
much nearer to the castle than they themselves were at present, she
asked why they had so far overpassed the castle, and come by this
circuitous course.

"Because," said Hugh, "we are not eagles outright.  Seest thou not,
just beyond the castle court, this whole crag of ours breaks off
short, falls like the town wall straight down into the plain?  Even
this cleft that we are crossing by, the only road a horse can pass,
breaks off short and sudden too, so that the river is obliged to take
leaps which nought else but a chamois could compass.  A footpath
there is, and Freiherr Eberhard takes it at all times, being born to
it; but even I am too stiff for the like.  Ha! ha!  Thy uncle may
talk of the Kaiser and his League, but he would change his note if we
had him here."

"Yet castles have been taken by hunger," said Christina.

"What, knowest thou so much?--True!  But look you," pointing to a
white foamy thread that descended the opposite steeps, "yonder beck
dashes through the castle court, and it never dries; and see you the
ledge the castle stands on?  It winds on out of your sight, and forms
a path which leads to the village of Adlerstein, out on the other
slope of the mountains; and ill were it for the serfs if they
victualled not the castle well."

The fearful steepness of the ground absorbed all Christina's
attention.  The road, or rather stairs, came down to the stream at
the bottom of the fissure, and then went again on the other side up
still more tremendous steeps, which Hugh climbed with a staff,
sometimes with his hand on the bridle, but more often only keeping a
watchful eye on the sure-footed mule, and an arm to steady his
daughter in the saddle when she grew absolutely faint with giddiness
at the abyss around her.  She was too much in awe of him to utter cry
or complaint, and, when he saw her effort to subdue her mortal
terror, he was far from unkind, and let her feel his protecting
strength.

Presently a voice was heard above--"What, Sorel, hast brought her!
Trudchen is wearying for her."

The words were in the most boorish dialect and pronunciation, the
stranger to Christina's ears, because intercourse with foreign
merchants, and a growing affectation of Latinism, had much refined
the city language to which she was accustomed; and she was surprised
to perceive by her father's gesture and address that the speaker must
be one of the lords of the castle.  She looked up, and saw on the
pathway above her a tall, large-framed young man, his skin dyed red
with sun and wind, in odd contrast with his pale shaggy hair,
moustache, and beard, as though the weather had tanned the one and
bleached the other.  His dress was a still shabbier buff suit than
her father had worn, but with a richly-embroidered belt sustaining a
hunting-horn with finely-chased ornaments of tarnished silver, and an
eagle's plume was fastened into his cap with a large gold Italian
coin.  He stared hard at the maiden, but vouchsafed her no token of
greeting--only distressed her considerably by distracting her
father's attention from her mule by his questions about the journey,
all in the same rude, coarse tone and phraseology.  Some amount of
illusion was dispelled.  Christina was quite prepared to find the
mountain lords dangerous ruffians, but she had expected the graces of
courtesy and high birth; but, though there was certainly an air of
command and freedom of bearing about the present specimen, his
manners and speech were more uncouth than those of any newly-caught
apprentice of her uncle, and she could not help thinking that her
good aunt Johanna need not have troubled herself about the danger of
her taking a liking to any such young Freiherr as she here beheld.

By this time a last effort of the mule had climbed to the level of
the castle.  As her father had shown her, there was precipice on two
sides of the building; on the third, a sheer wall of rock going up to
a huge height before it reached another of the Eagle's Steps; and on
the fourth, where the gateway was, the little beck had been made to
flow in a deep channel that had been hollowed out to serve as a moat,
before it bounded down to swell the larger water-course in the
ravine.  A temporary bridge had been laid across; the drawbridge was
out of order, and part of Hugh's business had been to procure
materials for mending its apparatus.  Christina was told to dismount
and cross on foot.  The unrailed board, so close to the abyss, and
with the wild water foaming above and below, was dreadful to her;
and, though she durst not speak, she hung back with an involuntary
shudder, as her father, occupied with the mule, did not think of
giving her a hand.  The young baron burst out into an unrestrained
laugh--a still greater shock to her feelings; but at the same time he
roughly took her hand, and almost dragged her across, saying, "City
bred--ho, ho!"  "Thanks, sir," she strove to say, but she was very
near weeping with the terror and strangeness of all around.

The low-browed gateway, barely high enough to admit a man on
horseback, opened before her, almost to her feelings like the gate of
the grave, and she could not help crossing herself, with a silent
prayer for protection, as she stepped under it, and came into the
castle court--not such a court as gave its name to fair courtesy,
but, if truth must be told, far more resembling an ill-kept, ill-
savoured stable-yard, with the piggeries opening into it.  In
unpleasantly close quarters, the Schneiderlein, or little tailor,
i.e. the biggest and fiercest of all the knappen, was grooming
Nibelung; three long-backed, long-legged, frightful swine were
grubbing in a heap of refuse; four or five gaunt ferocious-looking
dogs came bounding up to greet their comrade Festhold; and a great
old long-bearded goat stood on the top of the mixen, looking much
disposed to butt at any newcomer.  The Sorel family had brought
cleanliness from Flanders, and Hausfrau Johanna was scrupulously
dainty in all her appointments.  Christina scarcely knew how she
conveyed herself and her blue kirtle across the bemired stones to the
next and still darker portal, under which a wide but rough ill-hewn
stair ascended.  The stables, in fact, occupied the lower floor of
the main building, and not till these stairs had ascended above them
did they lead out into the castle hall.  Here were voices--voices
rude and harsh, like those Christina had shrunk from in passing
drinking booths.  There was a long table, with rough men-at-arms
lounging about, and staring rudely at her; and at the upper end, by a
great open chimney, sat, half-dozing, an elderly man, more rugged in
feature than his son; and yet, when he roused himself and spoke to
Hugh, there was a shade more of breeding, and less of clownishness in
his voice and deportment, as if he had been less entirely devoid of
training.  A tall darkly-robed woman stood beside him--it was her
harsh tone of reproof and command that had so startled Christina as
she entered--and her huge towering cap made her look gigantic in the
dim light of the smoky hall.  Her features had been handsome, but had
become hardened into a grim wooden aspect; and with sinking spirits
Christina paused at the step of the dais, and made her reverence,
wishing she could sink beneath the stones of the pavement out of
sight of these terrible personages.

"So that's the wench you have taken all this trouble for," was
Freiherrinn Kunigunde's greeting.  "She looks like another sick baby
to nurse; but I'll have no trouble about her;--that is all.  Take her
up to Ermentrude; and thou, girl, have a care thou dost her will, and
puttest none of thy city fancies into her head."

"And hark thee, girl," added the old Freiherr, sitting up.  "So thou
canst nurse her well, thou shalt have a new gown and a stout
husband."

"That way," pointed the lady towards one of the four corner towers;
and Christina moved doubtfully towards it, reluctant to quit her
father, her only protector, and afraid to introduce herself.  The
younger Freiherr, however, stepped before her, went striding two or
three steps at a time up the turret stair, and, before Christina had
wound her way up, she heard a thin, impatient voice say, "Thou saidst
she was come, Ebbo."

"Yes, even so," she heard Freiherr Eberhard return; "but she is slow
and town-bred.  She was afraid of crossing the moat."  And then both
laughed, so that Christina's cheeks tingled as she emerged from the
turret into another vaulted room.  "Here she is," quoth the brother;
"now will she make thee quite well."

It was a very bare and desolate room, with no hangings to the rough
stone walls, and scarcely any furniture, except a great carved
bedstead, one wooden chair, a table, and some stools.  On the bare
floor, in front of the fire, her arm under her head, and a profusion
of long hair falling round her like flax from a distaff, lay wearily
a little figure, beside whom Sir Eberhard was kneeling on one knee.

"Here is my sisterling," said he, looking up to the newcomer.  "They
say you burgher women have ways of healing the sick.  Look at her.
Think you you can heal her?"

In an excess of dumb shyness Ermentrude half rose, and effectually
hindered any observations on her looks by hiding her face away upon
her brother's knee.  It was the gesture of a child of five years old,
but Ermentrude's length of limb forbade Christina to suppose her less
than fourteen or fifteen.  "What, wilt not look at her?" he said,
trying to raise her head; and then, holding out one of her wasted,
feverish hands to Christina, he again asked, with a wistfulness that
had a strange effect from the large, tall man, almost ten years her
elder, "Canst thou cure her, maiden?"

"I am no doctor, sir," replied Christina; "but I could, at least,
make her more comfortable.  The stone is too hard for her."

"I will not go away; I want the fire," murmured the sick girl,
holding out her hands towards it, and shivering.

Christina quickly took off her own thick cloth mantle, well lined
with dressed lambskins, laid it on the floor, rolled the collar of it
over a small log of wood--the only substitute she could see for a
pillow--and showed an inviting couch in an instant.  Ermentrude let
her brother lay her down, and then was covered with the ample fold.
She smiled as she turned up her thin, wasted face, faded into the
same whitey-brown tint as her hair.  "That is good," she said, but
without thanks; and, feeling the soft lambswool:  "Is that what you
burgher-women wear?  Father is to give me a furred mantle, if only
some court dame would pass the Debateable Ford.  But the
Schlangenwaldern got the last before ever we could get down.  Jobst
was so stupid.  He did not give us warning in time; but he is to be
hanged next time if he does not."

Christina's blood curdled as she heard this speech in a weak little
complaining tone, that otherwise put her sadly in mind of Barbara
Schmidt's little sister, who had pined and wasted to death.  "Never
mind, Trudchen," answered the brother kindly; "meantime I have kept
all the wild catskins for thee, and may be this--this--SHE could sew
them up into a mantle for thee."

"O let me see," cried the young lady eagerly; and Sir Eberhard,
walking off, presently returned with an armful of the beautiful
brindled furs of the mountain cat, reminding Christina of her aunt's
gentle domestic favourite.  Ermentrude sat up, and regarded the
placing out of them with great interest; and thus her brother left
her employed, and so much delighted that she had not flagged, when a
great bell proclaimed that it was the time for the noontide meal, for
which Christina, in spite of all her fears of the company below
stairs, had been constrained by mountain air to look forward with
satisfaction.

Ermentrude, she found, meant to go down, but with no notion of the
personal arrangements that Christina had been wont to think a needful
preliminary.  With all her hair streaming, down she went, and was so
gladly welcomed by her father that it was plain that her presence was
regarded as an unusual advance towards recovery, and Christina feared
lest he might already be looking out for the stout husband.  She had
much to tell him about the catskin cloak, and then she was seized
with eager curiosity at the sight of Christina's bundles, and
especially at her lute, which she must hear at once.

"Not now," said her mother, "there will be jangling and jingling
enough by and by--meat now."

The whole establishment were taking their places--or rather tumbling
into them.  A battered, shapeless metal vessel seemed to represent
the salt-cellar, and next to it Hugh Sorel seated himself, and kept a
place for her beside him.  Otherwise she would hardly have had seat
or food.' She was now able to survey the inmates of the castle.
Besides the family themselves, there were about a dozen men, all
ruffianly-looking, and of much lower grade than her father, and three
women.  One, old Ursel, the wife of Hatto the forester, was a bent,
worn, but not ill-looking woman, with a motherly face; the younger
ones were hard, bold creatures, from whom Christina felt a shrinking
recoil.  The meal was dressed by Ursel and her kitchen boy.  From a
great cauldron, goat's flesh and broth together were ladled out into
wooden bowls.  That every one provided their own spoon and knife--no
fork--was only what Christina was used to in the most refined
society, and she had the implements in a pouch hanging to her girdle;
but she was not prepared for the unwashed condition of the bowls, nor
for being obliged to share that of her father--far less for the
absence of all blessing on the meal, and the coarse boisterousness of
manners prevailing thereat.  Hungry as she was, she did not find it
easy to take food under these circumstances, and she was relieved
when Ermentrude, overcome by the turmoil, grew giddy, and was carried
upstairs by her father, who laid her down upon her great bed, and
left her to the attendance of Christina.  Ursel had followed, but was
petulantly repulsed by her young lady in favour of the newcomer, and
went away grumbling.

Nestled on her bed, Ermentrude insisted on hearing the lute, and
Christina had to creep down to fetch it, with some other of her
goods, in trembling haste, and redoubled disgust at the aspect of the
meal, which looked even more repulsive in this later stage, and to
one who was no longer partaking of it.

Low and softly, with a voice whence she could scarcely banish tears,
and in dread of attracting attention, Christina sung to the sick
girl, who listened with a sort of rude wonder, and finally was lulled
to sleep.  Christina ventured to lay down her instrument and move
towards the window, heavily mullioned with stone, barred with iron,
and glazed with thick glass; being in fact the only glazed window in
the castle.  To her great satisfaction it did not look out over the
loathsome court, but over the opening of the ravine.  The apartment
occupied the whole floor of the keep; it was stone-paved, but the
roof was boarded, and there was a round turret at each angle.  One
contained the staircase, and was that which ran up above the keep,
served as a watch-tower, and supported the Eagle banner.  The other
three were empty, and one of these, which had a strong door, and a
long loophole window looking out over the open country, Christina
hoped that she might appropriate.  The turret was immediately over
the perpendicular cliff that descended into the plain.  A stone
thrown from the window would have gone straight down, she knew not
where.  Close to her ears rushed the descending waterfall in its leap
over the rock side, and her eyes could rest themselves on the green
meadow land below, and the smooth water of the Debateable Ford; nay--
far, far away beyond retreating ridges of wood and field--she thought
she could track a silver line and, guided by it, a something that
might be a city.  Her heart leapt towards it, but she was recalled by
Ermentrude's fretfully imperious voice.

"I was only looking forth from the window, lady," she said,
returning.

"Ah! thou saw'st no travellers at the Ford?" cried Ermentrude,
starting up with lively interest.

"No, lady; I was gazing at the far distance.  Know you if it be
indeed Ulm that we see from these windows?"

"Ulm?  That is where thou comest from?" said Ermentrude languidly.

"My happy home, with my dear uncle and aunt!  O, if I can but see it
hence, it will be joy!"

"I do not know.  Let me see," said Ermentrude, rising; but at the
window her pale blue eyes gazed vacantly as if she did not know what
she was looking at or for.

"Ah! if the steeple of the Dome Kirk were but finished, I could not
mistake it," said Christina.  "How beauteous the white spire will
look from hence!"

"Dome Kirk?" repeated Ermentrude; "what is that?"

Such an entire blank as the poor child's mind seemed to be was
inconceivable to the maiden, who had been bred up in the busy hum of
men, where the constant resort of strange merchants, the daily
interests of a self-governing municipality, and the numerous
festivals, both secular and religious, were an unconscious education,
even without that which had been bestowed upon her by teachers, as
well as by her companionship with her uncle, and participation in his
studies, taste and arts.

Ermentrude von Adlerstein had, on the contrary, not only never gone
beyond the Kohler's hut on the one side, and the mountain village on
the other, but she never seen more of life than the festival at the
wake the hermitage chapel there on Midsummer-day.  The only strangers
who ever came to the castle were disbanded lanzknechts who took
service with her father, or now and then a captive whom he put to
ransom.  She knew absolutely nothing of the world, except for a
general belief that Freiherren lived there to do what they chose with
other people, and that the House of Adlerstein was the freest and
noblest in existence.  Also there was a very positive hatred to the
house of Schlangenwald, and no less to that of Adlerstein
Wildschloss, for no reason that Christina could discover save that,
being a younger branch of the family, they had submitted to the
Emperor.  To destroy either the Graf von Schlangenwald, or her
Wildschloss cousin, was evidently the highest gratification
Ermentrude could conceive; and, for the rest, that her father and
brother should make successful captures at the Debateable Ford was
the more abiding, because more practicable hope.  She had no further
ideas, except perhaps to elude her mother's severity, and to desire
her brother's success in chamois-hunting.  The only mental culture
she had ever received was that old Ursel had taught her the Credo,
Pater Noster, and Ave, as correctly as might be expected from a long
course of traditionary repetitions of an incomprehensible language.
And she knew besides a few German rhymes and jingles, half Christian,
half heathen, with a legend or two which, if the names were
Christian, ran grossly wild from all Christian meaning or morality.
As to the amenities, nay, almost the proprieties, of life, they were
less known in that baronial castle than in any artisan's house at
Ulm.  So little had the sick girl figured them to herself, that she
did not even desire any greater means of ease than she possessed.
She moaned and fretted indeed, with aching limbs and blank weariness,
but without the slightest formed desire for anything to remove her
discomfort, except the few ameliorations she knew, such as sitting on
her brother's knee, with her head on his shoulder, or tasting the
mountain berries that he gathered for her.  Any other desire she
exerted herself to frame was for finery to be gained from the spoils
of travellers.

And this was Christina's charge, whom she must look upon as the least
alien spirit in this dreadful castle of banishment!  The young and
old lords seemed to her savage bandits, who frightened her only less
than did the proud sinister expression of the old lady, for she had
not even the merit of showing any tenderness towards the sickly girl,
of whom she was ashamed, and evidently regarded the town-bred
attendant as a contemptible interloper.

Long, long did the maiden weep and pray that night after Ermentrude
had sunk to sleep.  She strained her eyes with home-sick longings to
detect lights where she thought Ulm might be; and, as she thought of
her uncle and aunt, the poodle and the cat round the stove, the maids
spinning and the prentices knitting as her uncle read aloud some
grave good book, most probably the legend of the saint of the day,
and contrasted it with the rude gruff sounds of revelry that found
their way up the turret stairs, she could hardly restrain her sobs
from awakening the young lady whose bed she was to share.  She
thought almost with envy of her own patroness, who was cast into the
lake of Bolsena with a millstone about her neck--a better fate,
thought she, than to live on in such an abode of loathsomeness and
peril.

But then had not St. Christina floated up alive, bearing up her
millstone with her?  And had not she been put into a dungeon full of
venomous reptiles who, when they approached her, had all been changed
to harmless doves?  Christina had once asked Father Balthazar how
this could be; and had he not replied that the Church did not teach
these miracles as matters of faith, but that she might there discern
in figure how meek Christian holiness rose above all crushing
burthens, and transformed the rudest natures.  This poor maiden-
dying, perhaps; and oh! how unfit to live or die!--might it be her
part to do some good work by her, and infuse some Christian hope,
some godly fear?  Could it be for this that the saints had led her
hither?



CHAPTER III:  THE FLOTSAM AND JETSAM OF THE DEBATEABLE FORD



Life in Schloss Adlerstein was little less intolerable than
Christina's imagination had depicted it.  It was entirely devoid of
all the graces of chivalry, and its squalor and coarseness, magnified
into absurdity by haughtiness and violence, were almost
inconceivable.  Fortunately for her, the inmates of the castle
resided almost wholly below stairs in the hall and kitchen, and in
some dismal dens in the thickness of their walls.  The height of the
keep was intended for dignity and defence, rather than for
habitation; and the upper chamber, with its great state-bed, where
everybody of the house of Adlerstein was born and died, was not
otherwise used, except when Ermentrude, unable to bear the oppressive
confusion below stairs, had escaped thither for quietness' sake.  No
one else wished to inhabit it.  The chamber above was filled with the
various appliances for the defence of the castle; and no one would
have ever gone up the turret stairs had not a warder been usually
kept on the roof to watch the roads leading to the Ford.  Otherwise
the Adlersteiners had all the savage instinct of herding together in
as small a space as possible.

Freiherrin Kunigunde hardly ever mounted to her daughter's chamber.
All her affection was centred on the strong and manly son, of whom
she was proud, while the sickly pining girl, who would hardly find a
mate of her own rank, and who had not even dowry enough for a
convent, was such a shame and burthen to her as to be almost a
distasteful object.  But perversely, as it seemed to her, the only
daughter was the darling of both father and brother, who were ready
to do anything to gratify the girl's sick fancies, and hailed with
delight her pleasure in her new attendant.  Old Ursel was at first
rather envious and contemptuous of the childish, fragile stranger,
but her gentleness disarmed the old woman; and, when it was plain
that the young lady's sufferings were greatly lessened by tender
care, dislike gave way to attachment, and there was little more
murmuring at the menial services that were needed by the two maidens,
even when Ermentrude's feeble fancies, or Christina's views of dainty
propriety, rendered them more onerous than before.  She was even
heard to rejoice that some Christian care and tenderness had at last
reached her poor neglected child.

It was well for Christina that she had such an ally.  The poor child
never crept down stairs to the dinner or supper, to fetch food for
Ermentrude, or water for herself, without a trembling and shrinking
of heart and nerves.  Her father's authority guarded her from rude
actions, but from rough tongues he neither could nor would guard her,
nor understand that what to some would have been a compliment seemed
to her an alarming insult; and her chief safeguard lay in her own
insignificance and want of attraction, and still more in the modesty
that concealed her terror at rude jests sufficiently to prevent
frightening her from becoming an entertainment.

Her father, whom she looked on as a cultivated person in comparison
with the rest of the world, did his best for her after his own views,
and gradually brought her all the properties she had left at the
Kohler's hut.  Therewith she made a great difference in the aspect of
the chamber, under the full sanction of the lords of the castle.
Wolf, deer, and sheep skins abounded; and with these, assisted by her
father and old Hatto, she tapestried the lower part of the bare grim
walls, a great bear's hide covered the neighbourhood of the hearth,
and cushions were made of these skins, and stuffed from Ursel's
stores of feathers.  All these embellishments were watched with great
delight by Ermentrude, who had never been made of so much importance,
and was as much surprised as relieved by such attentions.  She was
too young and too delicate to reject civilization, and she let
Christina braid her hair, bathe her, and arrange her dress, with
sensations of comfort that were almost like health.  To train her
into occupying herself was however, as Christina soon found, in her
present state, impossible.  She could spin and sew a little, but
hated both; and her clumsy, listless fingers only soiled and wasted
Christina's needles, silk, and lute strings, and such damage was not
so easily remedied as in the streets of Ulm.  She was best provided
for when looking on at her attendant's busy hands, and asking to be
sung to, or to hear tales of the active, busy scenes of the city
life--the dresses, fairs, festivals, and guild processions.

The gentle nursing and the new interests made her improve in health,
so that her father was delighted, and Christina began to hope for a
return home.  Sometimes the two girls would take the air, either, on
still days, upon the battlements, where Ermentrude watched the
Debateable Ford, and Christina gazed at the Danube and at Ulm; or
they would find their way to a grassy nook on the mountain-side,
where Christina gathered gentians and saxifrage, trying to teach her
young lady that they were worth looking at, and sighing at the
thought of Master Gottfried's wreath when she met with the asphodel
seed-vessels.  Once the quiet mule was brought into requisition; and,
with her brother walking by her, and Sorel and his daughter in
attendance, Ermentrude rode towards the village of Adlerstein.  It
was a collection of miserable huts, on a sheltered slope towards the
south, where there was earth enough to grow some wretched rye and
buckwheat, subject to severe toll from the lord of the soil.  Perched
on a hollow rock above the slope was a rude little church, over a
cave where a hermit had once lived and died in such odour of sanctity
that, his day happening to coincide with that of St. John the
Baptist, the Blessed Freidmund had acquired the credit of the lion's
share both of the saint's honours and of the old solstitial feast of
Midsummer.  This wake was the one gaiety of the year, and attracted a
fair which was the sole occasion of coming honestly by anything from
the outer world; nor had his cell ever lacked a professional
anchorite.

The Freiherr of his day had been a devout man, who had gone a
pilgrimage with Kaiser Friedrich of the Red Beard, and had brought
home a bit of stone from the council chamber of Nicaea, which he had
presented to the little church that he had built over the cavern.  He
had named his son Friedmund; and there were dim memories of his days
as of a golden age, before the Wildschlossen had carried off the best
of the property, and when all went well.

This was Christina's first sight of a church since her arrival,
except that in the chapel, which was a dismal neglected vault, where
a ruinous altar and mouldering crucifix testified to its sacred
purpose.  The old baron had been excommunicated for twenty years,
ever since he had harried the wains of the Bishop of Augsburg on his
way to the Diet; and, though his household and family were not under
the same sentence, "Sunday didna come abune the pass."  Christina's
entreaty obtained permission to enter the little building, but she
had knelt there only a few moments before her father came to hurry
her away, and her supplications that he would some day take her to
mass there were whistled down the wind; and indeed the hermit was a
layman, and the church was only served on great festivals by a monk
from the convent of St. Ruprecht, on the distant side of the
mountain, which was further supposed to be in the Schlangenwald
interest.  Her best chance lay in infusing the desire into
Ermentrude, who by watching her prayers and asking a few questions
had begun to acquire a few clearer ideas.  And what Ermentrude wished
had always hitherto been acquiesced in by the two lords.

The elder baron came little into Christina's way.  He meant to be
kind to her, but she was dreadfully afraid of him, and, when he came
to visit his daughter, shrank out of his notice as much as possible,
shuddering most of all at his attempts at civilities.  His son she
viewed as one of the thickwitted giants meant to be food for the
heroism of good knights of romance.  Except that he was fairly
conversant with the use of weapons, and had occasionally ridden
beyond the shadow of his own mountain, his range was quite as limited
as his sister's; and he had an equal scorn for all beyond it.  His
unfailing kindness to his sister was however in his favour, and he
always eagerly followed up any suggestion Christina made for her
pleasure.

Much of his time was spent on the child, whose chief nurse and
playmate he had been throughout her malady; and when she showed him
the stranger's arrangements, or repeated to him, in a wondering,
blundering way, with constant appeals to her attendant, the new tales
she had heard, he used to listen with a pleased awkward amazement at
his little Ermentrude's astonishing cleverness, joined sometimes with
real interest, which was evinced by his inquiries of Christina.  He
certainly did not admire the little, slight, pale bower-maiden, but
he seemed to look upon her like some strange, almost uncanny, wise
spirit out of some other sphere, and his manner towards her had none
of the offensive freedom apparent in even the old man's patronage.
It was, as Ermentrude once said, laughing, almost as if he feared
that she might do something to him.

Christina had expected to see a ruffian, and had found a boor; but
she was to be convinced that the ruffian existed in him.  Notice came
up to the castle of a convoy of waggons, and all was excitement.
Men-at-arms were mustered, horses led down the Eagle's Ladder, and an
ambush prepared in the woods.  The autumn rains were already swelling
the floods, and the passage of the ford would be difficult enough to
afford the assailants an easy prey.

The Freiherrinn Kunigunde herself, and all the women of the castle,
hurried into Ermentrude's room to enjoy the view from her window.
The young lady herself was full of eager expectation, but she knew
enough of her maiden to expect no sympathy from her, and loved her
well enough not to bring down on her her mother's attention; so
Christina crept into her turret, unable to withdraw her eyes from the
sight, trembling, weeping, praying, longing for power to give a
warning signal.  Could they be her own townsmen stopped on the way to
dear Ulm?

She could see the waggons in mid-stream, the warriors on the bank;
she heard the triumphant outcries of the mother and daughter in the
outer room.  She saw the overthrow, the struggle, the flight of a few
scattered dark figures on the farther side, the drawing out of the
goods on the nearer.  Oh! were those leaping waves bearing down any
good men's corpses to the Danube, slain, foully slain by her own
father and this gang of robbers?

She was glad that Ermentrude went down with her mother to watch the
return of the victors.  She crouched on the floor, sobbing,
shuddering with grief and indignation, and telling her beads alike
for murdered and murderers, till, after the sounds of welcome and
exultation, she heard Sir Eberhard's heavy tread, as he carried his
sister up stairs.  Ermentrude went up at once to Christina.

"After all there was little for us!" she said.  "It was only a wain
of wine barrels; and now will the drunkards down stairs make good
cheer.  But Ebbo could only win for me this gold chain and medal
which was round the old merchant's neck."

"Was he slain?" Christina asked with pale lips.

"I only know I did not kill him," returned the baron; "I had him down
and got the prize, and that was enough for me.  What the rest of the
fellows may have done, I cannot say."

"But he has brought thee something, Stina," continued Ermentrude.
"Show it to her, brother."

"My father sends you this for your care of my sister," said Eberhard,
holding out a brooch that had doubtless fastened the band of the
unfortunate wine-merchant's bonnet.

"Thanks, sir; but, indeed, I may not take it," said Christina,
turning crimson, and drawing back.

"So!" he exclaimed, in amaze; then bethinking himself,--"They are no
townsfolk of yours, but Constance cowards."

"Take it, take it, Stina, or you will anger my father," added
Ermentrude.

"No, lady, I thank the barons both, but it were sin in me," said
Christina, with trembling voice.

"Look you," said Eberhard; "we have the full right--'tis a seignorial
right--to all the goods of every wayfarer that may be overthrown in
our river--as I am a true knight!" he added earnestly.

"A true knight!" repeated Christina, pushed hard, and very indignant
in all her terror.  "The true knight's part is to aid, not rob, the
weak."  And the dark eyes flashed a vivid light.

"Christina!" exclaimed Ermentrude in the extremity of her amazement,
"know you what you have said?--that Eberhard is no true knight!"

He meanwhile stood silent, utterly taken by surprise, and letting his
little sister fight his battles.

"I cannot help it, Lady Ermentrude," said Christina, with trembling
lips, and eyes filling with tears.  "You may drive me from the
castle--I only long to be away from it; but I cannot stain my soul by
saying that spoil and rapine are the deeds of a true knight."

"My mother will beat you," cried Ermentrude, passionately, ready to
fly to the head of the stairs; but her brother laid his hand upon
her.

"Tush, Trudchen; keep thy tongue still, child!  What does it hurt
me?"

And he turned on his heels and went down stairs.  Christina crept
into her turret, weeping bitterly and with many a wild thought.
Would they visit her offence on her father?  Would they turn them
both out together?  If so, would not her father hurl her down the
rocks rather than return her to Ulm?  Could she escape?  Climb down
the dizzy rocks, it might be, succour the merchant lying half dead on
the meadows, protect and be protected, be once more among God-fearing
Christians?  And as she felt her helplessness, the selfish thoughts
passed into a gush of tears for the murdered man, lying suffering
there, and for his possible wife and children watching for him.
Presently Ermentrude peeped in.

