"Stina, Stina, don't cry; I will not tell my mother!  Come out, and
finish my kerchief!  Come out!  No one shall beat you."

"That is not what I wept for, lady," said Christina.  "I do not think
you would bring harm on me.  But oh!  I would I were at home!  I
grieve for the bloodshed that I must see and may not hinder, and for
that poor merchant."

"Oh," said Ermentrude, "you need not fear for him!  I saw his own
folk return and lift him up.  But what is he to thee or to us?"

"I am a burgher maid, lady," said Christina, recovering herself, and
aware that it was of little use to bear testimony to such an auditor
as poor little Ermentrude against the deeds of her own father and
brother, which had in reality the sort of sanction Sir Eberhard had
mentioned, much akin to those coast rights that were the temptation
of wreckers.

Still she could not but tremble at the thought of her speech, and
went down to supper in greater trepidation than usual, dreading that
she should be expected to thank the Freiherr for his gift.  But,
fortunately, manners were too rare at Adlerstein for any such
omission to be remarkable, and the whole establishment was in a state
of noisy triumph and merriment over the excellence of the French wine
they had captured, so that she slipped into her seat unobserved.

Every available drinking-horn and cup was full.  Ermentrude was
eagerly presented with draughts by both father and brother, and
presently Sir Eberhard exclaimed, turning towards the shrinking
Christina with a rough laugh, "Maiden, I trow thou wilt not taste?"

Christina shook her head, and framed a negative with her lips.

"What's this?" asked her father, close to whom she sat.  "Is't a
fast-day?"

There was a pause.  Many were present who regarded a fast-day much
more than the lives or goods of their neighbours.  Christina again
shook her head.

"No matter," said good-natured Sir Eberhard, evidently wishing to
avert any ill consequence from her.  "'Tis only her loss."

The mirth went on rough and loud, and Christina felt this the worst
of all the miserable meals she had partaken of in fear and trembling
at this place of her captivity.  Ermentrude, too, was soon in such a
state of excitement, that not only was Christina's womanhood bitterly
ashamed and grieved for her, but there was serious danger that she
might at any moment break out with some allusion to her maiden's
recusancy in her reply to Sir Eberhard.

Presently however Ermentrude laid down her head and began to cry--
violent headache had come on--and her brother took her in his arms to
carry her up the stairs; but his potations had begun before hers, and
his step was far from steady; he stumbled more than once on the
steps, shook and frightened his sister, and set her down weeping
petulantly.  And then came a more terrible moment; his awe of
Christina had passed away; he swore that she was a lovely maiden,
with only too free a tongue, and that a kiss must be the seal of her
pardon.

A house full of intoxicated men, no living creature who would care to
protect her, scarce even her father!  But extremity of terror gave
her strength.  She spoke resolutely--"Sir Eberhard, your sister is
ill--you are in no state to be here.  Go down at once, nor insult a
free maiden."

Probably the low-toned softness of the voice, so utterly different
from the shrill wrangling notes of all the other women he had known,
took him by surprise.  He was still sober enough to be subdued,
almost cowed, by resistance of a description unlike all he had ever
seen; his alarm at Christina's superior power returned in full force,
he staggered to the stairs, Christina rushed after him, closed the
heavy door with all her force, fastened it inside, and would have
sunk down to weep but for Ermentrude's peevish wail of distress.

Happily Ermentrude was still a child, and, neglected as she had been,
she still had had no one to make her precocious in matters of this
kind.  She was quite willing to take Christina's view of the case,
and not resent the exclusion of her brother; indeed, she was unwell
enough to dread the loudness of his voice and rudeness of his
revelry.

So the door remained shut, and Christina's resolve was taken that she
would so keep it while the wine lasted.  And, indeed, Ermentrude had
so much fever all that night and the next day that no going down
could be thought of.  Nobody came near the maidens but Ursel, and she
described one continued orgie that made Christina shudder again with
fear and disgust.  Those below revelled without interval, except for
sleep; and they took their sleep just where they happened to sink
down, then returned again to the liquor.  The old baroness repaired
to the kitchen when the revelry went beyond even her bearing; but all
the time the wine held out, the swine in the court were, as Ursel
averred, better company than the men in the hall.  Yet there might
have been worse even than this; for old Ursel whispered that at the
bottom of the stairs there was a trap-door.  Did the maiden know what
it covered?  It was an oubliette.  There was once a Strasburg
armourer who had refused ransom, and talked of appealing to the
Kaiser.  He trod on that door and--Ursel pointed downwards.  "But
since that time," she said, "my young lord has never brought home a
prisoner."

No wonder that all this time Christina cowered at the discordant
sounds below, trembled, and prayed while she waited on her poor young
charge, who tossed and moaned in fever and suffering.  She was still
far from recovered when the materials of the debauch failed, and the
household began to return to its usual state.  She was soon
restlessly pining for her brother; and when her father came up to see
her, received him with scant welcome, and entreaties for Ebbo.  She
knew she should be better if she might only sit on his knee, and lay
her head on his shoulder.  The old Freiherr offered to accommodate
her; but she rejected him petulantly, and still called for Ebbo, till
he went down, promising that her brother should come.

With a fluttering heart Christina awaited the noble whom she had
perhaps insulted, and whose advances had more certainly insulted her.
Would he visit her with his anger, or return to that more offensive
familiarity?  She longed to flee out of sight, when, after a long
interval, his heavy tread was heard; but she could not even take
refuge in her turret, for Ermentrude was leaning against her.
Somehow, the step was less assured than usual; he absolutely knocked
at the door; and, when he came in, he acknowledged her by a slight
inclination of the head.  If she only had known it, this was the
first time that head had ever been bent to any being, human or
Divine; but all she did perceive was that Sir Eberhard was in neither
of the moods she dreaded, only desperately shy and sheepish, and
extremely ashamed, not indeed of his excess, which would have been,
even to a much tamer German baron, only a happy accident, but of what
had passed between himself and her.

He was much grieved to perceive how much ground Ermentrude had lost,
and gave himself up to fondling and comforting her; and in a few days
more, in their common cares for the sister, Christina lost her newly-
acquired horror of the brother, and could not but be grateful for his
forbearance; while she was almost entertained by the increased awe of
herself shown by this huge robber baron.



CHAPTER IV:  SNOW-WREATHS WHEN 'TIS THAW



Ermentrude had by no means recovered the ground she had lost, before
the winter set in; and blinding snow came drifting down day and
night, rendering the whole view, above and below, one expanse of
white, only broken by the peaks of rock which were too steep to
sustain the snow.  The waterfall lengthened its icicles daily, and
the whole court was heaped with snow, up even to the top of the high
steps to the hall; and thus, Christina was told, would it continue
all the winter.  What had previously seemed to her a strangely door-
like window above the porch now became the only mode of egress, when
the barons went out bear or wolf-hunting, or the younger took his
crossbow and hound to provide the wild-fowl, which, under Christina's
skilful hands, would tempt the feeble appetite of Ermentrude when she
was utterly unable to touch the salted meats and sausages of the
household.

In spite of all endeavours to guard the windows and keep up the fire,
the cold withered the poor child like a fading leaf, and she needed
more and more of tenderness and amusement to distract her attention
from her ailments.  Christina's resources were unfailing.  Out of the
softer pine and birch woods provided for the fire, she carved a set
of draughtsmen, and made a board by ruling squares on the end of a
settle, and painting the alternate ones with a compound of oil and
charcoal.  Even the old Baron was delighted with this contrivance,
and the pleasure it gave his daughter.  He remembered playing at
draughts in that portion of his youth which had been a shade more
polished, and he felt as if the game were making Ermentrude more hike
a lady.  Christina was encouraged to proceed with a set of chessmen,
and the shaping of their characteristic heads under her dexterous
fingers was watched by Ermentrude like something magical.  Indeed,
the young lady entertained the belief that there was no limit to her
attendant's knowledge or capacity.

Truly there was a greater brightness and clearness beginning to dawn
even upon poor little Ermentrude's own dull mind.  She took more
interest in everything:  songs were not solely lullabies, but she
cared to talk them over; tales to which she would once have been
incapable of paying attention were eagerly sought after; and, above
all, the spiritual vacancy that her mind had hitherto presented was
beginning to be filled up.  Christina had brought her own books--a
library of extraordinary extent for a maiden of the fifteenth
century, but which she owed to her uncle's connexion with the arts of
wood-cutting and printing.  A Vulgate from Dr. Faustus's own press, a
mass book and breviary, Thomas a Kempis's Imitation and the Nuremburg
Chronicle all in Latin, and the poetry of the gentle Minnesinger and
bird lover, Walther von Vogelweide, in the vernacular:  these were
her stock, which Hausfrau Johanna had viewed as a foolish
encumbrance, and Hugh Sorel would never have transported to the
castle unless they had been so well concealed in Christina's kirtles
that he had taken them for parts of her wardrobe.

Most precious were they now, when, out of the reach of all teaching
save her own, she had to infuse into the sinking girl's mind the
great mysteries of life and death, that so she might not leave the
world without more hope or faith than her heathen forefathers.  For
that Ermentrude would live Christina had never hoped, since that
fleeting improvement had been cut short by the fever of the wine-cup;
the look, voice, and tone had become so completely the same as those
of Regina Grundt's little sister who had pined and died.  She knew
she could not cure, but she could, she felt she could, comfort,
cheer, and soften, and she no longer repined at her enforced sojourn
at Adlerstein.  She heartily loved her charge, and could not bear to
think how desolate Ermentrude would be without her.  And now the poor
girl had become responsive to her care.  She was infinitely softened
in manner, and treated her parents with forms of respect new to them;
she had learnt even to thank old Ursel, dropped her imperious tone,
and struggled with her petulance; and, towards her brother, the
domineering, uncouth adherence was becoming real, tender affection;
while the dependent, reverent love she bestowed upon Christina was
touching and endearing in the extreme.

Freiherr von Adlerstein saw the change, and congratulated himself on
the effect of having a town-bred bower woman; nay, spoke of the
advantage it would be to his daughter, if he could persuade himself
to make the submission to the Kaiser which the late improvements
decided on at the Diet were rendering more and more inevitable.  NOW
how happy would be the winner of his gentle Ermentrude!

Freiherrinn von Adlerstein thought the alteration the mere change
from child to woman, and felt insulted by the supposition that any
one might not have been proud to match with a daughter of Adlerstein,
be she what she might.  As to submission to the Kaiser, that was mere
folly and weakness--kaisers, kings, dukes, and counts had broken
their teeth against the rock of Adlerstein before now!  What had come
over her husband and her son to make them cravens?

For Freiherr Eberhard was more strongly convinced than was his father
of the untenableness of their present position.  Hugh Sorel's reports
of what he heard at Ulm had shown that the league that had been
discussed at Regensburg was far more formidable than anything that
had ever previously threatened Schloss Adlerstein, and that if the
Graf von Schlangenwald joined in the coalition, there would be
private malice to direct its efforts against the Adlerstein family.
Feud-letters or challenges had been made unlawful for ten years, and
was not Adlerstein at feud with the world?

Nor did Eberhard look on the submission with the sullen rage and
grief that his father felt in bringing himself to such a declension
from the pride of his ancestors.  What the young Baron heard up
stairs was awakening in him a sense of the poorness and narrowness of
his present life.  Ermentrude never spared him what interested her;
and, partly from her lips, partly through her appeals to her
attendant, he had learnt that life had better things to offer than
independence on these bare rocks, and that homage might open the way
to higher and worthier exploits than preying upon overturned waggons.

Dietrich of Berne and his two ancestors, whose lengthy legend
Christina could sing in a low, soft recitative, were revelations to
him of what she meant by a true knight--the lion in war, the lamb in
peace; the quaint oft-repeated portraits, and still quainter cities,
of the Chronicle, with her explanations and translations, opened his
mind to aspirations for intercourse with his fellows, for an
honourable name, and for esteem in its degree such as was paid to Sir
Parzival, to Karl the Great, or to Rodolf of Hapsburgh, once a
mountain lord like himself.  Nay, as Ermentrude said, stroking his
cheek, and smoothing the flaxen beard, that somehow had become much
less rough and tangled than it used to be, "Some day wilt thou be
another Good Freiherr Eberhard, whom all the country-side loved, and
who gave bread at the castle-gate to all that hungered."

Her brother believed nothing of her slow declension in strength,
ascribing all the change he saw to the bitter cold, and seeing but
little even of that alteration, though he spent many hours in her
room, holding her in his arms, amusing her, or talking to her and to
Christina.  All Christina's fear of him was gone.  As long as there
was no liquor in the house, and he was his true self, she felt him to
be a kind friend, bound to her by strong sympathy in the love and
care for his sister.  She could talk almost as freely before him as
when alone with her young lady; and as Ermentrude's religious
feelings grew stronger, and were freely expressed to him, surely his
attention was not merely kindness and patience with the sufferer.

The girl's soul ripened rapidly under the new influences during her
bodily decay; and, as the days lengthened, and the stern hold of
winter relaxed upon the mountains, Christina looked with strange
admiration upon the expression that had dawned upon the features once
so vacant and dull, and listened with the more depth of reverence to
the sweet words of faith, hope and love, because she felt that a
higher, deeper teaching than she could give must have come to mould
the spirit for the new world to which it was hastening.


"Like an army defeated,
The snow had retreated,"


out of the valley, whose rich green shone smiling round the pool into
which the Debateable Ford spread.  The waterfall had burst its icy
bonds, and dashed down with redoubled voice, roaring rather than
babbling.  Blue and pink hepaticas--or, as Christina called them,
liver-krauts--had pushed up their starry heads, and had even been
gathered by Sir Eberhard, and laid on his sister's pillow.  The dark
peaks of rock came out all glistening with moisture, and the snow
only retained possession of the deep hollows and crevices, into which
however its retreat was far more graceful than when, in the city, it
was trodden by horse and man, and soiled with smoke.

Christina dreaded indeed that the roads should be open, but she could
not love the snow; it spoke to her of dreariness, savagery, and
captivity, and she watched the dwindling stripes with satisfaction,
and hailed the fall of the petty avalanches from one Eagle's Step to
another as her forefathers might have rejoiced in the defeat of the
Frost giants.

But Ermentrude had a love for the white sheet that lay covering a
gorge running up from the ravine.  She watched its diminution day by
day with a fancy that she was melting away with it; and indeed it was
on the very day that a succession of drifting showers had left the
sheet alone, and separated it from the masses of white above, that it
first fully dawned upon the rest of the family that, for the little
daughter of the house, spring was only bringing languor and sinking
instead of recovery.

Then it was that Sir Eberhard first really listened to her entreaty
that she might not die without a priest, and comforted her by passing
his word to her that, if--he would not say when--the time drew near,
he would bring her one of the priests who had only come from St.
Ruprecht's cloister on great days, by a sort of sufferance, to say
mass at the Blessed Friedmund's hermitage chapel.

The time was slow in coming.  Easter had passed with Ermentrude far
too ill for Christina to make the effort she had intended of going to
the church, even if she could get no escort but old Ursel--the sheet
of snow had dwindled to a mere wreath--the ford looked blue in the
sunshine--the cascade tinkled merrily down its rock--mountain
primroses peeped out, when, as Father Norbert came forth from saying
his ill-attended Pentecostal mass, and was parting with the infirm
peasant hermit, a tall figure strode up the pass, and, as the
villagers fell back to make way, stood before the startled priest,
and said, in a voice choked with grief, "Come with me."

"Who needs me?" began the astonished monk.

"Follow him not, father!" whispered the hermit.  "It is the young
Freiherr.--Oh have mercy on him, gracious sir; he has done your noble
lordships no wrong."

"I mean him no ill," replied Eberhard, clearing his voice with
difficulty; "I would but have him do his office.  Art thou afraid,
priest?"

"Who needs my office?" demanded Father Norbert.  "Show me fit cause,
and what should I dread?  Wherefore dost thou seek me?"

"For my sister," replied Eberhard, his voice thickening again.  "My
little sister lies at the point of death, and I have sworn to her
that a priest she shall have.  Wilt thou come, or shall I drag thee
down the pass?"

"I come, I come with all my heart, sir knight," was the ready
response.  "A few moments and I am at your bidding."

He stepped back into the hermit's cave, whence a stair led up to the
chapel.  The anchorite followed him, whispering--"Good father,
escape!  There will be full time ere he misses you.  The north door
leads to the Gemsbock's Pass; it is open now."

"Why should I baulk him?  Why should I deny my office to the dying?"
said Norbert.

"Alas! holy father, thou art new to this country, and know'st not
these men of blood!  It is a snare to make the convent ransom thee,
if not worse.  The Freiherrinn is a fiend for malice, and the
Freiherr is excommunicate."

"I know it, my son," said Norbert; "but wherefore should their child
perish unassoilzied?"

"Art coming, priest?" shouted Eberhard, from his stand at the mouth
of the cave.

And, as Norbert at once appeared with the pyx and other appliances
that he had gone to fetch, the Freiherr held out his hand with an
offer to "carry his gear for him;" and, when the monk refused, with
an inward shudder at entrusting a sacred charge to such unhallowed
hands, replied, "You will have work enow for both hands ere the
castle is reached."

But Father Norbert was by birth a sturdy Switzer, and thought little
of these Swabian Alps; and he climbed after his guide through the
most rugged passages of Eberhard's shortest and most perpendicular
cut without a moment's hesitation, and with agility worthy of a
chamois.  The young baron turned for a moment, when the level of the
castle had been gained, perhaps to see whether he were following, but
at the same time came to a sudden, speechless pause.

On the white masses of vapour that floated on the opposite side of
the mountain was traced a gigantic shadowy outline of a hermit, with
head bent eagerly forward, and arm outstretched.

The monk crossed himself.  Eberhard stood still for a moment, and
then said, hoarsely,--"The Blessed Friedmund!  He is come for her;"
then strode on towards the postern gate, followed by Brother Norbert,
a good deal reassured both as to the genuineness of the young Baron's
message and the probable condition of the object of his journey,
since the patron saint of her race was evidently on the watch to
speed her departing spirit.

Sir Eberhard led the way up the turret stairs to the open door, and
the monk entered the death-chamber.  The elder Baron sat near the
fire in the large wooden chair, half turned towards his daughter, as
one who must needs be present, but with his face buried in his hands,
unable to endure the spectacle.  Nearer was the tall form of his
wife, standing near the foot of the bed, her stern, harsh features
somewhat softened by the feelings of the moment.  Ursel waited at
hand, with tears running down her furrowed cheeks.

For such as these Father Norbert was prepared; but he little expected
to meet so pure and sweet a gaze of reverential welcome as beamed on
him from the soft, dark eyes of the little white-checked maiden who
sat on the bed, holding the sufferer in her arms.  Still less had he
anticipated the serene blessedness that sat on the wasted features of
the dying girl, and all the anguish of labouring breath.

She smiled a smile of joy, held up her hand, and thanked her brother.
Her father scarcely lifted his head, her mother made a rigid curtsey,
and with a grim look of sorrow coming over her features, laid her
hand over the old Baron's shoulder.  "Come away, Herr Vater," she
said; "he is going to hear her confession, and make her too holy for
the like of us to touch."

The old man rose up, and stepped towards his child.  Ermentrude held
out her arms to him, and murmured -

"Father, father, pardon me; I would have been a better daughter if I
had only known--"  He gathered her in his arms; he was quite past
speaking; and they only heard his heavy breathing, and one more
whisper from Ermentrude--"And oh! father, one day wilt thou seek to
be absolved?"  Whether he answered or not they knew not; he only gave
her repeated kisses, and laid her down on her pillows, then rushed to
the door, and the passionate sobs of the strong man's uncontrolled
nature might be heard upon the stair.  The parting with the others
was not necessarily so complete, as they were not, like him, under
censure of the Church; but Kunigunde leant down to kiss her; and, in
return to her repetition of her entreaty for pardon, replied, "Thou
hast it, child, if it will ease thy mind; but it is all along of
these new fancies that ever an Adlerstein thought of pardon.  There,
there, I blame thee not, poor maid; it thou wert to die, it may be
even best as it is.  Now must I to thy father; he is troubled enough
about this gear."

But when Eberhard moved towards his sister, she turned to the priest,
and said, imploringly, "Not far, not far!  Oh! let them," pointing to
Eberhard and Christina, "let them not be quite out of sight!"

"Out of hearing is all that is needed, daughter," replied the priest;
and Ermentrude looked content as Christina moved towards the empty
north turret, where, with the door open, she was in full view, and
Eberhard followed her thither.  It was indeed fully out of earshot of
the child's faint, gasping confession.  Gravely and sadly both stood
there.  Christina looked up the hillside for the snow-wreath.  The
May sunshine had dissolved it; the green pass lay sparkling without a
vestige of its white coating.  Her eyes full of tears, she pointed
the spot out to Eberhard.  He understood; but, leaning towards her,
told, under his breath, of the phantom he had seen.  Her eyes
expanded with awe of the supernatural.  "It was the Blessed
Friedmund," said Eberhard.  "Never hath he so greeted one of our race
since the pious Freiherrinn Hildegarde.  Maiden, hast thou brought us
back a blessing?"

"Ah! well may she be blessed--well may the saints stoop to greet
her," murmured Christina, with strangled voice, scarcely able to
control her sobs.

Father Norbert came towards them.  The simple confession had been
heard, and he sought the aid of Christina in performing the last
rites of the Church.

"Maiden," he said to her, "thou hast done a great and blessed work,
such as many a priest might envy thee."

Eberhard was not excluded during the final services by which the soul
was to be dismissed from its earthly dwelling-place.  True, he
comprehended little of their import, and nothing of the words, but he
gazed meekly, with uncovered head, and a bewildered look of sadness,
while Christina made her responses and took her part with full
intelligence and deep fervour, sorrowing indeed for the companion who
had become so dear to her, but deeply thankful for the spiritual
consolation that had come at last.  Ermentrude lay calm, and, as it
were, already rapt into a higher world, lighting up at the German
portions of the service, and not wholly devoid of comprehension of
the spirit even of the Latin, as indeed she had come to the border of
the region where human tongues and languages are no more.

She was all but gone when the rite of extreme unction was completed,
and they could only stand round her, Eberhard, Christina, Ursel, and
the old Baroness, who had returned again, watching the last
flutterings of the breath, the window thrown wide open that nothing
might impede the passage of the soul to the blue vault above.

The priest spoke the beautiful commendation, "Depart, O Christian
soul."  There was a faint gesture in the midst for Christina to lift
her in her arms--a sign to bend down and kiss her brow--but her last
look was for her brother, her last murmur, "Come after me; be the
Good Baron Ebbo."



CHAPTER V:  THE YOUNG FREIHERR



Ermentrude von Adlerstein slept with her forefathers in the vaults of
the hermitage chapel, and Christina Sorel's work was done.

Surely it was time for her to return home, though she should be more
sorry to leave the mountain castle than she could ever have believed
possible.  She entreated her father to take her home, but she
received a sharp answer that she did not know what she was talking
of:  the Schlangenwald Reitern were besetting all the roads; and
moreover the Ulm burghers had taken the capture of the Constance wine
in such dudgeon that for a retainer of Adlerstein to show himself in
the streets would be an absolute asking for the wheel.

But was there any hope for her?  Could he not take her to some
nunnery midway, and let her write to her uncle to fetch her from
thence?

He swore at woman's pertinacity, but allowed at last that if the
plan, talked of by the Barons, of going to make their submission to
the Emperor at Linz, with a view to which all violence at the ford
had ceased, should hold good, it might be possible thus to drop her
on their way.

With this Christina must needs content herself.  Poor child, not only
had Ermentrude's death deprived her of the sole object of her
residence at Schloss Adlerstein, but it had infinitely increased the
difficulties of her position.  No one interfered with her possession
of the upper room and its turrets; and it was only at meal times that
she was obliged to mingle with the other inhabitants, who, for the
most part, absolutely overlooked the little shrinking pale maiden but
with one exception, and that the most perplexing of all.  She had
been on terms with Freiherr Eberhard that were not so easily broken
off as if she had been an old woman of Ursel's age.  All through his
sister's decline she had been his comforter, assistant, director,
living in intercourse and sympathy that ought surely to cease when
she was no longer his sister's attendant, yet which must be more than
ever missed in the full freshness of the stroke.

Even on the earliest day of bereavement, a sudden thought of Hausfrau
Johanna flashed upon Christina, and reminded her of the guard she
must keep over herself if she would return to Ulm the same modest
girl whom her aunt could acquit of all indiscretion.  Her cheeks
flamed, as she sat alone, with the very thought, and the next time
she heard the well-known tread on the stair, she fled hastily into
her own turret chamber, and shut the door.  Her heart beat fast.  She
could hear Sir Eberhard moving about the room, and listened to his
heavy sigh as he threw himself into the large chair.  Presently he
called her by name, and she felt it needful to open her door and
answer, respectfully,

"What would you, my lord?"

"What would I?  A little peace, and heed to her who is gone.  To see
my father and mother one would think that a partridge had but flown
away.  I have seen my father more sorrowful when his dog had fallen
over the abyss."

"Mayhap there is more sorrow for a brute that cannot live again,"
said Christina.  "Our bird has her nest by an Altar that is lovelier
and brighter than even our Dome Kirk will ever be."

"Sit down, Christina," he said, dragging a chair nearer the hearth.
"My heart is sore, and I cannot bear the din below.  Tell me where my
bird is flown."

"Ah! sir; pardon me.  I must to the kitchen," said Christina,
crossing her hands over her breast, to still her trembling heart, for
she was very sorry for his grief, but moving resolutely.

"Must?  And wherefore?  Thou hast nought to do there; speak truth!
Why not stay with me?" and his great light eyes opened wide.

"A burgher maid may not sit down with a noble baron."

"The devil!  Has my mother been plaguing thee, child?"

"No, my lord," said Christina, "she reeks not of me; but"--steadying
her voice with great difficulty--"it behoves me the more to be
discreet."

"And you would not have me come here!" he said, with a wistful tone
of reproach.

"I have no power to forbid you; but if you do, I must betake me to
Ursel in the kitchen," said Christina, very low, trembling and half
choked.

"Among the rude wenches there!" he cried, starting up.  "Nay, nay,
that shall not be!  Rather will I go."

"But this is very cruel of thee, maiden," he added, lingering, "when
I give thee my knightly word that all should be as when she whom we
both loved was here," and his voice shook.

"It could not so be, my lord," returned Christina with drooping,
blushing face; "it would not be maidenly in me.  Oh, my lord, you are
kind and generous, make it not hard for me to do what other maidens
less lonely have friends to do for them!"

"Kind and generous?" said Eberhard, leaning over the back of the
chair as if trying to begin a fresh score.  "This from you, who told
me once I was no true knight!"

"I shall call you a true knight with all my heart," cried Christina,
the tears rushing into her eyes, "if you will respect my weakness and
loneliness."

He stood up again, as if to move away; then paused, and, twisting his
gold chain, said, "And how am I ever to be what the happy one bade
me, if you will not show me how?"

"My error would never show you the right," said Christina, with a
strong effort at firmness, and retreating at once through the door of
the staircase, whence she made her way to the kitchen, and with great
difficulty found an excuse for her presence there.

It had been a hard struggle with her compassion and gratitude, and,
poor little Christina felt with dismay, with something more than
these.  Else why was it that, even while principle and better sense
summoned her back to Ulm, she experienced a deadly weariness of the
city-pent air, of the grave, heavy roll of the river, nay, even of
the quiet, well-regulated household?  Why did such a marriage as she
had thought her natural destiny, with some worthy, kind-hearted
brother of the guild, become so hateful to her that she could only
aspire to a convent life?  This same burgomaster would be an
estimable man, no doubt, and those around her were ruffians, but she
felt utterly contemptuous and impatient of him.  And why was the
interchange of greetings, the few words at meals, worth all the rest
of the day besides to her?  Her own heart was the traitor, and to her
own sensations the poor little thing had, in spirit at least,
transgressed all Aunt Johanna's precepts against young Barons.  She
wept apart, and resolved, and prayed, cruelly ashamed of every start
of joy or pain that the sight of Eberhard cost her.  From almost the
first he had sat next her at the single table that accommodated the
whole household at meals, and the custom continued, though on some
days he treated her with sullen silence, which she blamed herself for
not rejoicing in, sometimes he spoke a few friendly words; but he
observed, better than she could have dared to expect, her test of his
true knighthood, and never again forced himself into her apartment,
though now and then he came to the door with flowers, with mountain
strawberries, and once with two young doves.  "Take them, Christina,"
he said, "they are very like yourself;" and he always delayed so long
that she was forced to be resolute, and shut the door on him at last.

Once, when there was to be a mass at the chapel, Hugh Sorel, between
a smile and a growl, informed his daughter that he would take her
thereto.  She gladly prepared, and, bent on making herself agreeable
to her father, did not once press on him the necessity of her return
to Ulm.  To her amazement and pleasure, the young Baron was at
church, and when on the way home, he walked beside her mule, she
could see no need of sending him away.

He had been in no school of the conventionalities of life, and, when
he saw that Hugh Sorel's presence had obtained him this favour, he
wistfully asked, "Christina, if I bring your father with me, will you
not let me in?"

"Entreat me not, my lord," she answered, with fluttering breath.

She felt the more that she was right in this decision, when she
encountered her father's broad grin of surprise and diversion, at
seeing the young Baron help her to dismount.  It was a look of
receiving an idea both new, comical, and flattering, but by no means
the look of a father who would resent the indignity of attentions to
his daughter from a man whose rank formed an insuperable barrier to
marriage.

The effect was a new, urgent, and most piteous entreaty, that he
would find means of sending her home.  It brought upon her the
hearing put into words what her own feelings had long shrunk from
confessing to herself.

"Ah!  Why, what now?  What, is the young Baron after thee?  Ha! ha!
petticoats are few enough up here, but he must have been ill off ere
he took to a little ghost like thee!  I saw he was moping and
doleful, but I thought it was all for his sister."

"And so it is, father."

"Tell me that, when he watches every turn of that dark eye of thine--
the only good thing thou took'st of mine!  Thou art a witch, Stina."

"Hush, oh hush, for pity's sake, father, and let me go home!"

"What, thou likest him not?  Thy mind is all for the mincing
goldsmith opposite, as I ever told thee."

"My mind is--is to return to my uncle and aunt the true-hearted
maiden they parted with," said Christina, with clasped hands.  "And
oh, father, as you were the son of a true and faithful mother, be a
father to me now!  Jeer not your motherless child, but protect her
and help her."

Hugh Sorel was touched by this appeal, and he likewise recollected
how much it was for his own interest that his brother should be
satisfied with the care he took of his daughter.  He became convinced
that the sooner she was out of the castle the better, and at length
bethought him that, among the merchants who frequented the Midsummer
Fair at the Blessed Friedmund's Wake, a safe escort might be found to
convey her back to Ulm.

If the truth were known, Hugh Sorel was not devoid of a certain
feeling akin to contempt, both for his young master's taste, and for
his forbearance in not having pushed matters further with a being so
helpless, meek, and timid as Christina, more especially as such
slackness had not been his wont in other cases where his fancy had
been caught.

But Sorel did not understand that it was not physical beauty that
here had been the attraction, though to some persons, the sweet,
pensive eyes, the delicate, pure skin, the slight, tender form, might
seem to exceed in loveliness the fully developed animal comeliness
chiefly esteemed at Adlerstein.  It was rather the strangeness of the
power and purity of this timid, fragile creature, that had struck the
young noble.  With all their brutal manners reverence for a lofty
female nature had been in the German character ever since their
Velleda prophesied to them, and this reverence in Eberhard bowed at
the feet of the pure gentle maiden, so strong yet so weak, so wistful
and entreating even in her resolution, refined as a white flower on a
heap of refuse, wise and dexterous beyond his slow and dull
conception, and the first being in whom he had ever seen piety or
goodness; and likewise with a tender, loving spirit of consolation
such as he had both beheld and tasted by his sister's deathbed.

There was almost a fear mingled with his reverence.  If he had been
more familiar with the saints, he would thus have regarded the holy
virgin martyrs, nay, even Our Lady herself; and he durst not push her
so hard as to offend her, and excite the anger or the grief that he
alike dreaded.  He was wretched and forlorn without the resources he
had found in his sister's room; the new and better cravings of his
higher nature had been excited only to remain unsupplied and
disappointed; and the affectionate heart in the freshness of its
sorrow yearned for the comfort that such conversation had supplied:
but the impression that had been made on him was still such, that he
knew that to use rough means of pressing his wishes would no more
lead to his real gratification than it would to appropriate a snow-
bell by crushing it in his gauntlet.

And it was on feeble little Christina, yielding in heart, though not
in will, that it depended to preserve this reverence, and return
unscathed from this castle, more perilous now than ever.



CHAPTER VI:  THE BLESSED FRIEDMUND'S WAKE



Midsummer-Day arrived, and the village of Adlerstein presented a most
unusual spectacle.  The wake was the occasion of a grand fair for all
the mountain-side, and it was an understood thing that the Barons,
instead of molesting the pedlars, merchants, and others who attended
it, contented themselves with demanding a toll from every one who
passed the Kohler's hut on the one side, or the Gemsbock's Pass on
the other; and this toll, being the only coin by which they came
honestly in the course of the year, was regarded as a certainty and
highly valued.  Moreover, it was the only time that any purchases
could be made, and the flotsam of the ford did not always include all
even of the few requirements of the inmates of the castle; it was the
only holiday, sacred or secular, that ever gladdened the Eagle's
Rock.

So all the inmates of the castle prepared to enjoy themselves, except
the heads of the house.  The Freiherr had never been at one of these
wakes since the first after he was excommunicated, when he had
stalked round to show his indifference to the sentence; and the
Freiherrinn snarled out such sentences of disdain towards the
concourse, that it might be supposed that she hated the sight of her
kind; but Ursel had all the household purchases to make, and the
kitchen underlings were to take turns to go and come, as indeed were
the men-at-arms, who were set to watch the toll-bars.

Christina had packed up a small bundle, for the chance of being
unable to return to the castle without missing her escort, though she
hoped that the fair might last two days, and that she should thus be
enabled to return and bring away the rest of her property.  She was
more and more resolved on going, but her heart was less and less
inclined to departure.  And bitter had been her weeping through all
the early light hours of the long morning--weeping that she tried to
think was all for Ermentrude; and all, amid prayers she could scarce
trust herself to offer, that the generous, kindly nature might yet
work free of these evil surroundings, and fulfil the sister's dying
wish, she should never see it; but, when she should hear that the
Debateable Ford was the Friendly Ford, then would she know that it
was the doing of the Good Baron Ebbo.  Could she venture on telling
him so?  Or were it not better that there were no farewell?  And she
wept again that he should think her ungrateful.  She could not
persuade herself to release the doves, but committed the charge to
Ursel to let them go in case she should not return.

So tear-stained was her face, that, ashamed that it should be seen,
she wrapped it closely in her hood and veil when she came down and
joined her father.  The whole scene swam in tears before her eyes
when she saw the whole green slope from the chapel covered with tents
and booths, and swarming with pedlars and mountaineers in their
picturesque dresses.  Women and girls were exchanging the yarn of
their winter's spinning for bright handkerchiefs; men drove sheep,
goats, or pigs to barter for knives, spades, or weapons; others were
gazing at simple shows--a dancing bear or ape--or clustering round a
Minnesinger; many even then congregating in booths for the sale of
beer.  Further up, on the flat space of sward above the chapel, were
some lay brothers, arranging for the representation of a mystery--a
kind of entertainment which Germany owed to the English who came to
the Council of Constance, and which the monks of St. Ruprecht's hoped
might infuse some religious notions into the wild, ignorant
mountaineers.

First however Christina gladly entered the church.  Crowded though it
were, it was calmer than the busy scene without.  Faded old tapestry
was decking its walls, representing apparently some subject entirely
alien to St. John or the blessed hermit; Christina rather thought it
was Mars and Venus, but that was all the same to every one else.  And
there was a terrible figure of St. John, painted life-like, with a
real hair-cloth round his loins, just opposite to her, on the step of
the Altar; also poor Friedmund's bones, dressed up in a new serge
amice and hood; the stone from Nicaea was in a gilded box, ready in
due time to be kissed; and a preaching friar (not one of the monks of
St. Ruprecht's) was in the midst of a sermon, telling how St. John
presided at the Council of Nicaea till the Emperor Maximius cut off
his head at the instance of Herodius--full justice being done to the
dancing--and that the blood was sprinkled on this very stone,
whereupon our Holy Father the Pope decreed that whoever would kiss
the said stone, and repeat the Credo five times afterwards, should be
capable of receiving an indulgence for 500 years:  which indulgence
must however be purchased at the rate of six groschen, to be bestowed
in alms at Rome.  And this inestimable benefit he, poor Friar Peter,
had come from his brotherhood of St. Francis at Offingen solely to
dispense to the poor mountaineers.

It was disappointing to find this profane mummery going on instead of
the holy services to which Christina had looked forward for strength
and comfort; she was far too well instructed not to be scandalized at
the profane deception which was ripening fast for Luther, only thirty
years later; and, when the stone was held up by the friar in one
hand, the printed briefs of indulgence in the other, she shrunk back.
Her father however said, "Wilt have one, child?  Five hundred years
is no bad bargain."

"My uncle has small trust in indulgences," she whispered.

"All lies, of course," quoth Hugh; "yet they've the Pope's seal, and
I have more than half a mind to get one.  Five hundred years is no
joke, and I am sure of purgatory, since I bought this medal at the
Holy House of Loretto."

And he went forward, and invested six groschen in one of the papers,
the most religious action poor Christina had ever seen him perform.
Other purchasers came forward--several, of the castle knappen, and a
few peasant women who offered yarn or cheeses as equivalents for
money, but were told with some insolence to go and sell their goods,
and bring the coin.

After a time, the friar, finding his traffic slack, thought fit to
remove, with his two lay assistants, outside the chapel, and try the
effects of an out-of-door sermon.  Hugh Sorel, who had been hitherto
rather diverted by the man's gestures and persuasions, now decided on
going out into the fair in quest of an escort for his daughter, but
as she saw Father Norbert and another monk ascending from the stairs
leading to the hermit's cell, she begged to be allowed to remain in
the church, where she was sure to be safe, instead of wandering about
with him in the fair.

He was glad to be unencumbered, though he thought her taste
unnatural; and, promising to return for her when he had found an
escort, he left her.

Father Norbert had come for the very purpose of hearing confessions,
and Christina's next hour was the most comfortable she had spent
since Ermentrude's death.

After this however the priests were called away, and long, long did
Christina first kneel and then sit in the little lonely church,
hearing the various sounds without, and imagining that her father had
forgotten her, and that he and all the rest were drinking, and then
what would become of her?  Why had she quitted old Ursel's
protection?

Hours of waiting and nameless alarm must have passed, for the sun was
waxing low, when at length she heard steps coming up the hermit's
cell, and a head rose above the pavement which she recognized with a
wild throb of joy, but, repressing her sense of gladness, she only
exclaimed, "Oh, where is my father!"

"I have sent him to the toll at the Gemsbock's Pass," replied Sir
Eberhard, who had by this time come up the stairs, followed by
Brother Peter and the two lay assistants.  Then, as Christina turned
on him her startled, terrified eyes in dismay and reproach for such
thoughtlessness, he came towards her, and, bending his head and
opening his hand, he showed on his palm two gold rings.  "There,
little one," he said; "now shalt thou never again shut me out."

Her senses grew dizzy.  "Sir," she faintly said, "this is no place to
delude a poor maiden."

"I delude thee not.  The brother here waits to wed us."

"Impossible!  A burgher maid is not for such as you."

"None but a burgher maid will I wed," returned Sir Eberhard, with all
the settled resolution of habits of command.  "See, Christina, thou
art sweeter and better than any lady in the land; thou canst make me
what she--the blessed one who lies there--would have me.  I love thee
as never knight loved lady.  I love thee so that I have not spoken a
word to offend thee when my heart was bursting; and"--as he saw her
irrepressible tears--"I think thou lovest me a little."

"Ah!" she gasped with a sob, "let me go."

"Thou canst not go home; there is none here fit to take charge of
thee.  Or if there were, I would slay him rather than let thee go.
No, not so," he said, as he saw how little those words served his
cause; "but without thee I were a mad and desperate man.  Christina,
I will not answer for myself if thou dost not leave this place my
wedded wife."

"Oh!" implored Christina, "if you would only betroth me, and woo me
like an honourable maiden from my home at Ulm!"

"Betroth thee, ay, and wed thee at once," replied Eberhard, who, all
along, even while his words were most pleading, had worn a look and
manner of determined authority and strength, good-natured indeed, but
resolved.  "I am not going to miss my opportunity, or baulk the
friar."

The friar, who had meantime been making a few needful arrangements
for the ceremony, advanced towards them.  He was a good-humoured,
easy-going man, who came prepared to do any office that came in his
way on such festival days at the villages round; and peasant
marriages at such times were not uncommon.  But something now
staggered him, and he said anxiously -

"This maiden looks convent-bred!  Herr Reiter, pardon me; but if this
be the breaking of a cloister, I can have none of it."

"No such thing," said Eberhard; "she is town-bred, that is all."

"You would swear to it, on the holy mass yonder, both of you?" said
the friar, still suspiciously.

"Yea," replied Eberhard, "and so dost thou, Christina."

This was the time if ever to struggle against her destiny.  The friar
would probably have listened to her if she had made any vehement
opposition to a forced marriage, and if not, a few shrieks would have
brought perhaps Father Norbert, and certainly the whole population;
but the horror and shame of being found in such a situation, even
more than the probability that she might meet with vengeance rather
than protection, withheld her.  Even the friar could hardly have
removed her, and this was her only chance of safety from the
Baroness's fury.  Had she hated and loathed Sir Eberhard, perhaps she
had striven harder, but his whole demeanour constrained and quelled
her, and the chief effort she made against yielding was the reply, "I
am no cloister maid, holy father, but--"

The "but" was lost in the friar's jovial speech.  "Oh, then, all is
well!  Take thy place, pretty one, there, by the door, thou know'st
it should be in the porch, but--ach, I understand!" as Eberhard
quietly drew the bolt within.  "No, no, little one, I have no time
for bride scruples and coyness; I have to train three dull-headed
louts to be Shem, Ham, and Japhet before dark.  Hast confessed of
late?"

"This morning, but--" said Christina, and "This morning," to her
great joy, said Eberhard, and, in her satisfaction thereat, her
second "but" was not followed up.

The friar asked their names, and both gave the Christian name alone;
then the brief and simple rite was solemnized in its shortest form.
Christina had, by very force of surprise and dismay, gone through all
without signs of agitation, except the quivering of her whole frame,
and the icy coldness of the hand, where Eberhard had to place the
ring on each finger in turn.

But each mutual vow was a strange relief to her long-tossed and
divided mind, and it was rest indeed to let her affection have its
will, and own him indeed as a protector to be loved instead of
shunned.  When all was over, and he gathered the two little cold
hands into his large one, his arm supporting her trembling form, she
felt for the moment, poor little thing, as if she could never be
frightened again.

Parish registers were not, even had this been a parish church, but
Brother Peter asked, when he had concluded, "Well, my son, which of
his flock am I to report to your Pfarrer as linked together?"

"The less your tongue wags on that matter till I call on you, the
better," was the stern reply.  "Look you, no ill shall befall you if
you are wise, but remember, against the day I call you to bear
witness, that you have this day wedded Baron Eberhard von Adlerstein
the younger, to Christina, the daughter of Hugh Sorel, the Esquire of
Ulm."

"Thou hast played me a trick, Sir Baron!" said the friar, somewhat
dismayed, but more amused, looking up at Eberhard, who, as Christina
now saw, had divested himself of his gilt spurs, gold chain, silvered
belt and horn, and eagle's plume, so as to have passed for a simple