
lanzknecht.  "I would have had no such gear as this!"

"So I supposed," said Eberhard coolly.

"Young folks! young folks!" laughed the friar, changing his tone, and
holding up his finger slyly; "the little bird so cunningly nestled in
the church to fly out my Lady Baroness!  Well, so thou hast a pretty,
timid lambkin there, Sir Baron.  Take care you use her mildly."

Eberhard looked into Christina's face with a smile, that to her, at
least, was answer enough; and he held out half a dozen links of his
gold chain to the friar, and tossed a coin to each of the lay
brethren.

"Not for the poor friar himself," explained Brother Peter, on
receiving this marriage fee; "it all goes to the weal of the
brotherhood."

"As you please," said Eberhard.  "Silence, that is all!  And thy
friary--?"

"The poor house of St. Francis at Offingen for the present, noble
sir," said the priest.  "There will you hear of me, if you find me
not.  And now, fare thee well, my gracious lady.  I hope one day thou
wilt have more words to thank the poor brother who has made thee a
noble Baroness."

"Ah, good father, pardon my fright and confusion," Christina tried to
murmur, but at that moment a sudden glow and glare of light broke out
on the eastern rock, illuminating the fast darkening little church
with a flickering glare, that made her start in terror as if the
fires of heaven were threatening this stolen marriage; but the friar
and Eberhard both exclaimed, "The Needfire alight already!"  And she
recollected how often she had seen these bonfires on Midsummer night
shining red on every hill around Ulm.  Loud shouts were greeting the
uprising flame, and the people gathering thicker and thicker on the
slope.  The friar undid the door to hasten out into the throng, and
Eberhard said he had left his spurs and belt in the hermit's cell,
and must return thither, after which he would walk home with his
bride, moving at the same time towards the stair, and thereby causing
a sudden scuffle and fall.  "So, master hermit," quoth Eberhard, as
the old man picked himself up, looking horribly frightened; "that's
your hermit's abstraction, is it?  No whining, old man, I am not
going to hurt thee, so thou canst hold thy tongue.  Otherwise I will
smoke thee out of thy hole like a wild cat!  What, thou aiding me
with my belt, my lovely one?  Thanks; the snap goes too hard for thy
little hands.  Now, then, the fire will light us gaily down the
mountain side."

But it soon appeared that to depart was impossible, unless by forcing
a way through the busy throng in the full red glare of the firelight,
and they were forced to pause at the opening of the hermit's cave,
Christina leaning on her husband's arm, and a fold of his mantle
drawn round her to guard her from the night-breeze of the mountain,
as they waited for a quiet space in which to depart unnoticed.  It
was a strange, wild scene!  The fire was on a bare, flat rock, which
probably had been yearly so employed ever since the Kelts had brought
from the East the rite that they had handed on to the Swabians--the
Beltane fire, whose like was blazing everywhere in the Alps, in the
Hartz, nay, even in England, Scotland, and on the granite points of
Ireland.  Heaped up for many previous days with faggots from the
forest, then apparently inexhaustible, the fire roared and crackled,
and rose high, red and smoky, into the air, paling the moon, and
obscuring the stars.  Round it, completely hiding the bonfire itself,
were hosts of dark figures swarming to approach it--all with a
purpose.  All held old shoes or superannuated garments in their hands
to feed the flame; for it was esteemed needful that every villager
should contribute something from his house--once, no doubt, as an
offering to Bel, but now as a mere unmeaning observance.  And shrieks
of merriment followed the contribution of each too well-known article
of rubbish that had been in reserve for the Needfire!  Girls and boys
had nuts to throw in, in pairs, to judge by their bounces of future
chances of matrimony.  Then came a shouting, tittering, and falling
back, as an old boor came forward like a priest with something heavy
and ghastly in his arms, which was thrown on with a tremendous shout,
darkened the glow for a moment, then hissed, cracked, and emitted a
horrible odour.

It was a horse's head, the right owner of which had been carefully
kept for the occasion, though long past work.  Christina shuddered,
and felt as if she had fallen upon a Pagan ceremony; as indeed was
true enough, only that the Adlersteiners attached no meaning to the
performance, except a vague notion of securing good luck.

With the same idea the faggots were pulled down, and arranged so as
to form a sort of lane of fire.  Young men rushed along it, and then
bounded over the diminished pile, amid loud shouts of laughter and
either admiration or derision; and, in the meantime, a variety of
odd, recusant noises, grunts, squeaks, and lowings proceeding from
the darkness were explained to the startled little bride by her
husband to come from all the cattle of the mountain farms around, who
were to have their weal secured by being driven through the Needfire.

It may well be imagined that the animals were less convinced of the
necessity of this performance than their masters.  Wonderful was the
clatter and confusion, horrible the uproar raised behind to make the
poor things proceed at all, desperate the shout when some half-
frantic creature kicked or attempted a charge wild the glee when a
persecuted goat or sheep took heart of grace, and flashed for one
moment between the crackling, flaring, smoking walls.  When one cow
or sheep off a farm went, all the others were pretty sure to follow
it, and the owner had then only to be on the watch at the other end
to turn them back, with their flame-dazzled eyes, from going unawares
down the precipice, a fate from which the passing through the fire
was evidently not supposed to ensure them.  The swine, those special
German delights, were of course the most refractory of all.  Some, by
dint of being pulled away from the lane of fire, were induced to rush
through it; but about half-way they generally made a bolt, either
sidelong through the flaming fence or backwards among the legs of
their persecutors, who were upset amid loud imprecations.  One huge,
old, lean, high-backed sow, with a large family, truly feminine in
her want of presence of mind, actually charged into the midst of the
bonfire itself, scattering it to the right and left with her snout,
and emitting so horrible a smell of singed bacon, that it might
almost be feared that some of her progeny were anticipating the
invention of Chinese roasting-pigs.  However, their proprietor,
Jobst, counted them out all safe on the other side, and there only
resulted some sighs and lamentations among the seniors, such as Hatto
and Ursel, that it boded ill to have the Needfire trodden out by an
old sow.

All the castle live-stock were undergoing the same ceremony.
Eberhard concerned himself little about the vagaries of the sheep and
pigs, and only laughed a little as the great black goat, who had seen
several Midsummer nights, and stood on his guard, made a sudden short
run and butted down old Hatto, then skipped off like a chamois into
the darkness, unheeding, the old rogue, the whispers that connected
his unlucky hue with the doings of the Walpurgisnacht.  But when it
came to the horses, Eberhard could not well endure the sight of the
endeavours to force them, snorting, rearing, and struggling, through
anything so abhorrent to them as the hedge of fire.

The Schneiderlein, with all the force of his powerful arm, had hold
of Eberhard's own young white mare, who, with ears turned back,
nostrils dilated, and wild eyes, her fore-feet firmly planted wide
apart, was using her whole strength for resistance; and, when a heavy
blow fell on her, only plunged backwards, and kicked without
advancing.  It was more than Eberhard could endure, and Christina's
impulse was to murmur, "O do not let him do it;" but this he scarcely
heard, as he exclaimed, "Wait for me here!" and, as he stepped
forward, sent his voice before him, forbidding all blows to the mare.

The creature's extreme terror ceased at once upon hearing his voice,
and there was an instant relaxation of all violence of resistance as
he came up to her, took her halter from the Schneiderlein, patted her
glossy neck, and spoke to her.  But the tumult of warning voices
around him assured him that it would be a fatal thing to spare the
steed the passage through the fire, and he strove by encouragements
and caresses with voice and hand to get her forward, leading her
himself; but the poor beast trembled so violently, and, though making
a few steps forward, stopped again in such exceeding horror of the
flame, that Eberhard had not the heart to compel her, turned her head
away, and assured her that she should not be further tormented.

"The gracious lordship is wrong," said public opinion, by the voice
of old Bauer Ulrich, the sacrificer of the horse's head.  "Heaven
forfend that evil befall him and that mare in the course of the
year."

And the buzz of voices concurred in telling of the recusant pigs who
had never developed into sausages, the sheep who had only escaped to
be eaten by wolves, the mule whose bones had been found at the bottom
of an abyss.

Old Ursel was seriously concerned, and would have laid hold on her
young master to remonstrate, but a fresh notion had arisen--Would the
gracious Freiherr set a-rolling the wheel, which was already being
lighted in the fire, and was to conclude the festivities by being
propelled down the hill--figuring, only that no one present knew it,
the sun's declension from his solstitial height?  Eberhard made no
objection; and Christina, in her shelter by the cave, felt no little
dismay at being left alone there, and moreover had a strange, weird
feeling at the wild, uncanny ceremony he was engaged in, not knowing
indeed that it was sun-worship, but afraid that it could be no other
than unholy sorcery.

The wheel, flaring or reddening in all its spokes, was raised from
the bonfire, and was driven down the smoothest piece of green sward,
which formed an inclined plane towards the stream.  If its course was
smooth, and it only became extinguished by leaping into the water,
the village would flourish; and prosperity above all was expected if
it should spring over the narrow channel, and attempt to run up the
other side.  Such things had happened in the days of the good
Freiherren Ebbo and Friedel, though the wheel had never gone right
since the present baron had been excommunicated; but his heir having
been twice seen at mass in this last month great hopes were founded
upon him.

There was a shout to clear the slope.  Eberhard, in great earnest and
some anxiety, accepted the gauntlet that he was offered to protect
his hand, steadied the wheel therewith, and, with a vigorous impulse
from hand and foot, sent it bounding down the slope, among loud cries
and a general scattering of the idlers who had crowded full into the
very path of the fiery circle, which flamed up brilliantly for the
moment as it met the current of air.  But either there was an
obstacle in the way, or the young Baron's push had not been quite
straight:  the wheel suddenly swerved aside, its course swerved to
the right, maugre all the objurgations addressed to it as if it had
been a living thing, and the next moment it had disappeared, all but
a smoky, smouldering spot of red, that told where it lay, charring
and smoking on its side, without having fulfilled a quarter of its
course.

People drew off gravely and silently, and Eberhard himself was
strangely discomfited when he came back to the hermitage, and,
wrapping Christina in his cloak, prepared to return, so soon as the
glare of the fire should have faded from his eyesight enough to make
it safe to tread so precipitous a path.  He had indeed this day made
a dangerous venture, and both he and Christina could not but feel
disheartened by the issue of all the omens of the year, the more
because she had a vague sense of wrong in consulting or trusting
them.  It seemed to her all one frightened, uncomprehended dream ever
since her father had left her in the chapel; and, though conscious of
her inability to have prevented her marriage, yet she blamed herself,
felt despairing as she thought of the future, and, above all, dreaded
the Baron and the Baroness and their anger.  Eberhard, after his
first few words, was silent, and seemed solely absorbed in leading
her safely along the rocky path, sometimes lifting her when he
thought her in danger of stumbling.  It was one of the lightest,
shortest nights of the year, and a young moon added to the brightness
in open places, while in others it made the rocks and stones cast
strange elvish shadows.  The distance was not entirely lost; other
Beltane fires could be seen, like beacons, on every hill, and the few
lights in the castle shone out like red fiery eyes in its heavy dark
pile of building.

Before entering, Eberhard paused, pulled off his own wedding-ring,
and put it into his bosom, and taking his bride's hand in his, did
the same for her, and bade her keep the ring till they could wear
them openly.

"Alas! then," said Christina, "you would have this secret?"

"Unless I would have to seek thee down the oubliette, my little one,"
said Eberhard "or, what might even be worse, see thee burnt on the
hillside for bewitching me with thine arts!  No, indeed, my darling.
Were it only my father, I could make him love thee; but my mother--I
could not trust her where she thought the honour of our house
concerned.  It shall not be for long.  Thou know'st we are to make
peace with the Kaiser, and then will I get me employment among
Kurfurst Albrecht's companies of troops, and then shalt thou prank it
as my Lady Freiherrinn, and teach me the ways of cities."

"Alas!  I fear me it has been a great sin!" sighed the poor little
wife.

"For thee--thou couldst not help it," said Eberhard; "for me--who
knows how many deadly ones it may hinder?  Cheer up, little one; no
one can harm thee while the secret is kept."

Poor Christina had no choice but submission; but it was a sorry
bridal evening, to enter her husband's home in shrinking terror; with
the threat of the oubliette before her, and with a sense of shame and
deception hanging upon her, making the wonted scowl of the old
baroness cut her both with remorse and dread.

She did indeed sit beside her bridegroom at the supper, but how
little like a bride! even though he pushed the salt-cellar, as if by
accident, below her place.  She thought of her myrtle, tended in vain
at home by Barbara Schmidt; she thought of Ulm courtships, and how
all ought to have been; the solemn embassage to her uncle, the
stately negotiations; the troth plight before the circle of
ceremonious kindred and merry maidens, of whom she had often been
one--the subsequent attentions of the betrothed on all festival days,
the piles of linen and all plenishings accumulated since babyhood,
and all reviewed and laid out for general admiration (Ah! poor Aunt
Johanna still spinning away to add to the many webs in her walnut
presses!)--then the grand procession to fetch home the bride, the
splendid festival with the musicians, dishes, and guest-tables to the
utmost limit that was allowed by the city laws, and the bride's hair
so joyously covered by her matron's curch amid the merriment of her
companion maidens.

Poor child!  After she had crept away to her own room, glad that her
father was not yet returned, she wept bitterly over the wrong that
she felt she had done to the kind uncle and aunt, who must now look
in vain for their little Christina, and would think her lost to them,
and to all else that was good.  At least she had had the Church's
blessing--but that, strange to say, was regarded, in burgher life
before the Reformation, as rather the ornament of a noble marriage
than as essential to the civil contract; and a marriage by a priest
was regarded by the citizens rather as a means of eluding the need of
obtaining the parent's consent, than as a more regular and devout
manner of wedding.  However, Christina felt this the one drop of
peace.  The blessings and prayers were warm at her heart, and gave
her hope.  And as to drops of joy, of them there was no lack, for had
not she now a right to love Eberhard with all her heart and
conscience, and was not it a wonderful love on his part that had made
him stoop to the little white-faced burgher maid, despised even by
her own father?  O better far to wear the maiden's uncovered head for
him than the myrtle wreath for any one else!



CHAPTER VII:  THE SCHNEIDERLEIN'S RETURN



The poor little unowned bride had more to undergo than her
imagination had conceived at the first moment.

When she heard that the marriage was to be a secret, she had not
understood that Eberhard was by no means disposed to observe much
more caution than mere silence.  A rough, though kindly man, he did
not thoroughly comprehend the shame and confusion that he was
bringing upon her by departing from his former demeanour.  He knew
that, so enormous was the distance then supposed to exist between the
noble and the burgher, there was no chance of any one dreaming of the
true state of the case, and that as long as Christina was not taken
for his wife, there was no personal danger for her from his mother,
who--so lax were the morals of the German nobility with regard to all
of inferior rank--would tolerate her with complacency as his
favourite toy; and he was taken by surprise at the agony of grief and
shame with which she slowly comprehended his assurance that she had
nothing to fear.

There was no help for it.  The oubliette would probably be the
portion of the low-born girl who had interfered with the sixteen
quarterings of the Adlerstein shield, and poor Christina never
stepped across its trap-door without a shudder lest it should open
beneath her.  And her father would probably have been hung from the
highest tower, in spite of his shrewd care to be aware of nothing.
Christina consoled herself with the hope that he knew all the time
why he had been sent out of the way, for, with a broad grin that had
made her blush painfully, he had said he knew she would be well taken
care of, and that he hoped she was not breaking her heart for want of
an escort.  She tried to extort Eberhard's permission to let him at
least know how it was; but Eberhard laughed, saying he believed the
old fox knew just as much as he chose; and, in effect, Sorel, though
now and then gratifying his daughter's scruples, by serving as a
shield to her meetings with the young Baron, never allowed himself to
hear a hint of the true state of affairs.

Eberhard's love and reverence were undiminished, and the time spent
with him would have been perfectly happy could she ever have divested
herself of anxiety and alarm; but the periods of his absence from the
castle were very terrible to her, for the other women of the
household, quick to perceive that she no longer repelled him, had
lost that awe that had hitherto kept them at a distance from her, and
treated her with a familiarity, sometimes coarse, sometimes spiteful,
always hateful and degrading.  Even old Ursel had become half-
pitying, half-patronizing; and the old Baroness, though not molesting
her, took not the slightest notice of her.

This state of things lasted much longer than there had been reason to
expect at the time of the marriage.  The two Freiherren then intended
to set out in a very short time to make their long talked-of
submission to the Emperor at Ratisbon; but, partly from their German
tardiness of movement, partly from the obstinate delays interposed by
the proud old Freiherrinn, who was as averse as ever to the measure,
partly from reports that the Court was not yet arrived at Ratisbon,
the expedition was again and again deferred, and did not actually
take place till September was far advanced.

Poor Christina would have given worlds to go with them, and even
entreated to be sent to Ulm with an avowal of her marriage to her
uncle and aunt, but of this Eberhard would not hear.  He said the
Ulmers would thus gain an hostage, and hamper his movements; and, if
her wedding was not to be confessed--poor child!--she could better
bear to remain where she was than to face Hausfrau Johanna.  Eberhard
was fully determined to enrol himself in some troop, either Imperial,
or, if not, among the Free Companies, among whom men of rank were
often found, and he would then fetch or send for his wife and avow
her openly, so soon as she should be out of his mother's reach.  He
longed to leave her father at home, to be some protection to her, but
Hugh Sorel was so much the most intelligent and skilful of the
retainers as to be absolutely indispensable to the party--he was
their only scribe; and moreover his new suit of buff rendered him a
creditable member of a troop that had been very hard to equip.  It
numbered about ten men-at-arms, only three being left at home to
garrison the castle--namely, Hatto, who was too old to take; Hans,
who had been hopelessly lame and deformed since the old Baron had
knocked him off a cliff in a passion; and Squinting Matz, a runaway
servant, who had murdered his master, the mayor of Strasburg, and
might be caught and put to death if any one recognized him.  If
needful the villagers could always be called in to defend the castle:
but of this there was little or no danger--the Eagle's Steps were
defence enough in themselves, and the party were not likely to be
absent more than a week or ten days--a grievous length of time, poor
Christina thought, as she stood straining her eyes on the top of the
watch-tower, to watch them as far as possible along the plain.  Her
heart was very sad, and the omen of the burning wheel so continually
haunted her that even in her sleep that night she saw its brief
course repeated, beheld its rapid fall and extinction, and then
tracked the course of the sparks that darted from it, one rising and
gleaming high in air till it shone like a star, another pursuing a
fitful and irregular, but still bright course amid the dry grass on
the hillside, just as she had indeed watched some of the sparks on
that night, minding her of the words of the Allhallow-tide legend:
"Fulgebunt justi et tanquam scintillae in arundinete discurrent"--a
sentence which remained with her when awake, and led her to seek it
out in her Latin Bible in the morning.

Reluctantly had she gone down to the noontide meal, feeling, though
her husband and father were far less of guardians than they should
have been, yet that there was absolute rest, peace, and protection in
their presence compared with what it was to be alone with Freiherrinn
Kunigunde and her rude women without them.  A few sneers on her
daintiness and uselessness had led her to make an offer of assisting
in the grand chopping of sausage meat and preparation of winter
stores, and she had been answered with contempt that my young lord
would not have her soil her delicate hands, when one of the maids who
had been sent to fetch beer from the cellar came back with startled
looks, and the exclamation, "There is the Schneiderlein riding up the
Eagle's Ladder upon Freiherr Ebbo's white mare!"

All the women sprang up together, and rushed to the window, whence
they could indeed recognize both man and horse; and presently it
became plain that both were stained with blood, weary, and spent;
indeed, nothing but extreme exhaustion would have induced the man-at-
arms to trust the tired, stumbling horse up such a perilous path.

Loud were the exclamations, "Ah! no good could come of not leading
that mare through the Johannisfeuer."

"This shameful expedition!  Only harm could befall.  This is thy
doing, thou mincing city-girl."

"All was certain to go wrong when a pale mist widow came into the
place."

The angry and dismayed cries all blended themselves in confusion in
the ears of the only silent woman present; the only one that sounded
distinctly on her brain was that of the last speaker, "A pale, mist
widow," as, holding herself a little in the rear of the struggling,
jostling little mob of women, who hardly made way even for their
acknowledged lady, she followed with failing limbs the universal rush
to the entrance as soon as man and horse had mounted the slope and
were lost sight of.

A few moments more, and the throng of expectants was at the foot of
the hall steps, just as the lanzknecht reached the arched entrance.
His comrade Hans took his bridle, and almost lifted him from his
horse; he reeled and stumbled as, pale, battered, and bleeding, he
tried to advance to Freiherinn Kunigunde, and, in answer to her hasty
interrogation, faltered out, "Ill news, gracious lady.  We have been
set upon by the accursed Schlangenwaldern, and I am the only living
man left."

Christina scarce heard even these last words; senses and powers alike
failed her, and she sank back on the stone steps in a deathlike
swoon.

When she came to herself she was lying on her bed, Ursel and Else,
another of the women, busy over her, and Ursel's voice was saying,
"Ah, she is coming round.  Look up, sweet lady, and fear not.  You
are our gracious Lady Baroness."

"Is he here?  O, has he said so?  O, let me see him--Sir Eberhard,"
faintly cried Christina with sobbing breath.

"Ah, no, no," said the old woman; "but see here," and she lifted up
Christina's powerless, bloodless hand, and showed her the ring on the
finger.  Her bosom had been evidently searched when her dress was
loosened in her swoon, and her ring found and put in its place.
"There, you can hold up your head with the best of them; he took care
of that--my dear young Freiherr, the boy that I nursed," and the old
woman's burst of tears brought back the truth to Christina's s
reviving senses.

"Oh, tell me," she said, trying to raise herself, "was it indeed so?
O say it was not as he said!"

"Ah, woe's me, woe's me, that it was even so," lamented Ursel; "but
oh, be still, look not so wild, dear lady.  The dear, true-hearted
young lord, he spent his last breath in owning you for his true lady,
and in bidding us cherish you and our young baron that is to be.  And
the gracious lady below--she owns you; there is no fear of her now;
so vex not yourself, dearest, most gracious lady."

Christina did not break out into the wailing and weeping that the old
nurse expected; she was still far too much stunned and overwhelmed,
and she entreated to be told all, lying still, but gazing at Ursel
with piteous bewildered eyes.  Ursel and Else helping one another
out, tried to tell her, but they were much confused; all they knew
was that the party had been surprised at night in a village hostel by
the Schlangenwaldern, and all slain, though the young Baron had lived
long enough to charge the Schneiderlein with his commendation of his
wife to his mother; but all particulars had been lost in the general
confusion.

"Oh, let me see the Schneiderlein," implored Christina, by this time
able to rise and cross the room to the large carved chair; and Ursel
immediately turned to her underling, saying, "Tell the Schneiderlein
that the gracious Lady Baroness desires his presence."

Else's wooden shoes clattered down stairs, but the next moment she
returned.  "He cannot come; he is quite spent, and he will let no one
touch his arm till Ursel can come, not even to get off his doublet."

"I will go to him," said Christina, and, revived by the sense of
being wanted, she moved at once to the turret, where she kept some
rag and some ointment, which she had found needful in the latter
stages of Ermentrude's illness--indeed, household surgery was a part
of regular female education, and Christina had had plenty of practice
in helping her charitable aunt, so that the superiority of her skill
to that of Ursel had long been avowed in the castle.  Ursel made no
objection further than to look for something that could be at once
converted into a widow's veil--being in the midst of her grief quite
alive to the need that no matronly badge should be omitted--but
nothing came to hand in time, and Christina was descending the
stairs, on her way to the kitchen, where she found the fugitive man-
at-arms seated on a rough settle, his head and wounded arm resting on
the table, while groans of pain, weariness, and impatience were
interspersed with imprecations on the stupid awkward girls who
surrounded him.

Pity and the instinct of affording relief must needs take the
precedence even of the desire to hear of her husband's fate; and, as
the girls hastily whispered, "Here she is," and the lanzknecht
hastily tried to gather himself up, and rise with tokens of respect;
she bade him remain still, and let her see what she could do for him.
In fact, she at once perceived that he was in no condition to give a
coherent account of anything, he was so completely worn out, and in
so much suffering.  She bade at once that some water should be
heated, and some of the broth of the dinner set on the fire; then
with the shears at her girdle, and her soft, light fingers, she
removed the torn strip of cloth that had been wound round the arm,
and cut away the sleeve, showing the arm not broken, but gashed at
the shoulder, and thence the whole length grazed and wounded by the
descent of the sword down to the wrist.  So tender was her touch,
that he scarcely winced or moaned under her hand; and, when she
proceeded, with Ursel's help, to bathe the wound with the warm water,
the relief was such that the wearied man absolutely slumbered during
the process, which Christina protracted on that very account.  She
then dressed and bandaged the arm, and proceeded to skim--as no one
else in the castle would do--the basin of soup, with which she then
fed her patient as he leant back in the corner of the settle, at
first in the same somnolent, half-conscious state in which he had
been ever since the relief from the severe pain; but after a few
spoonfuls the light and life came back to his eye, and he broke out,
"Thanks, thanks, gracious lady!  This is the Lady Baroness for me!
My young lord was the only wise man!  Thanks, lady; now am I my own
man again.  It had been long ere the old Freiherrinn had done so much
for me!  I am your man, lady, for life or death!"  And, before she
knew what he was about, the gigantic Schneiderlein had slid down on
his knees, seized her hand, and kissed it--the first act of homage to
her rank, but most startling and distressing to her.  "Nay," she
faltered, "prithee do not; thou must rest.  Only if--if thou canst
only tell me if he, my own dear lord, sent me any greeting, I would
wait to hear the rest till thou hast slept."

"Ah! the dog of Schlangenwald!" was the first answer; then, as he
continued, "You see, lady, we had ridden merrily as far as Jacob
Muller's hostel, the traitor," it became plain that he meant to begin
at the beginning.  She allowed Ursel to seat her on the bench
opposite to his settle, and, leaning forward, heard his narrative
like one in a dream.  There, the Schneiderlein proceeded to say, they
put up for the night, entirely unsuspicious of evil; Jacob Muller,
who was known to himself, as well as to Sorel and to the others,
assuring them that the way was clear to Ratisbon, and that he heard
the Emperor was most favourably disposed to any noble who would
tender his allegiance.  Jacob's liquors were brought out, and were
still in course of being enjoyed, when the house was suddenly
surrounded by an overpowering number of the retainers of
Schlangenwald, with their Count himself at their head.  He had been
evidently resolved to prevent the timely submission of the enemies of
his race, and suddenly presenting himself before the elder Baron, had
challenged him to instantaneous battle, claiming credit to himself
for not having surprised them when asleep.  The disadvantage had been
scarcely less than if this had been the case, for the Adlersteinern
were all half-intoxicated, and far inferior in numbers--at least, on
the showing of the Schneiderlein--and a desperate fight had ended by
his being flung aside in a corner, bound fast by the ankles and
wrists, the only living prisoner, except his young lord, who, having
several terrible wounds, the worst in his chest, was left unbound.

Both lay helpless, untended, and silent, while the revel that had
been so fatal to them was renewed by their captors, who finally all
sunk into a heavy sleep.  The torches were not all spent, and the
moonlight shone into the room, when the Schneiderlein, desperate from
the agony caused by the ligature round his wounded arm, sat up and
looked about him.  A knife thrown aside by one of the drunkards lay
near enough to be grasped by his bound hands, and he had just reached
it when Sir Eberhard made a sign to him to put it into his hand, and
therewith contrived to cut the rope round both hands and feet--then
pointed to the door.

There was nothing to hinder an escape; the men slept the sleep of the
drunken; but the Schneiderlein, with the rough fidelity of a
retainer, would have lingered with a hope of saving his master.  But
Eberhard shook his head, and signed again to escape; then, making him
bend down close to him, he used all his remaining power to whisper,
as he pressed his sword into the retainer's hand, -

"Go home; tell my mother--all the world--that Christina Sorel is my
wife, wedded on the Friedmund Wake by Friar Peter of Offingen, and if
she should bear a child, he is my true and lawful heir.  My sword for
him--my love to her.  And if my mother would not be haunted by me,
let her take care of her."

These words were spoken with extreme difficulty, for the nature of
the wound made utterance nearly impossible, and each broken sentence
cost a terrible effusion of blood.  The final words brought on so
choking and fatal a gush that, said the Schneiderlein, "he fell back
as I tried to hold him up, and I saw that it was all at an end, and a
kind and friendly master and lord gone from me.  I laid him down, and
put his cross on his breast that I had seen him kissing many a time
that evening; and I crossed his hands, and wiped the blood from them
and his face.  And, lady, he had put on his ring; I trust the robber
caitiff's may have left it to him in his grave.  And so I came forth,
walking soft, and opening the door in no small dread, not of the
snoring swine, but of the dogs without.  But happily they were still,
and even by the door I saw all our poor fellows stark and stiff."

"My father?" asked Christina.

"Ay! with his head cleft open by the Graf himself.  He died like a
true soldier, lady, and we have lost the best head among us in him.
Well, the knave that should have watched the horses was as drunken as
the rest of them, and I made a shift to put the bridle on the white
mare and ride off."

Such was the narrative of the Schneiderlein, and all that was left to
Christina was the picture of her husband's dying effort to guard her,
and the haunting fancy of those long hours of speechless agony on the
floor of the hostel, and how direful must have been his fears for
her.  Sad and overcome, yet not sinking entirely while any work of
comfort remained, her heart yearned over her companion in misfortune,
the mother who had lost both husband and son; and all her fears of
the dread Freiherrinn could not prevent her from bending her steps,
trembling and palpitating as she was, towards the hall, to try
whether the daughter-in-law's right might be vouchsafed to her, of
weeping with the elder sufferer.

The Freiherrinn sat by the chimney, rocking herself to and fro, and
holding consultation with Hatto.  She started as she saw Christina
approaching, and made a gesture of repulsion; but, with the feeling
of being past all terror in this desolate moment, Christina stepped
nearer, knelt, and, clasping her hands, said, "Your pardon, lady."

"Pardon!" returned the harsh voice, even harsher for very grief,
"thou hast naught to fear, girl.  As things stand, thou canst not
have thy deserts.  Dost hear?"

"Ah, lady, it was not such pardon that I meant.  If you would let me
be a daughter to you."

"A daughter!  A wood-carver's girl to be a daughter of Adlerstein!"
half laughed the grim Baroness.  "Come here, wench," and Christina
underwent a series of sharp searching questions on the evidences of
her marriage.

"So," ended the old lady, "since better may not be, we must own thee
for the nonce.  Hark ye all, this is the Frau Freiherrinn, Freiherr
Eberhard's widow, to be honoured as such," she added, raising her
voice.  "There, girl, thou hast what thou didst strive for.  Is not
that enough?"

"Alas! lady," said Christina, her eyes swimming in tears, "I would
fain have striven to be a comforter, or to weep together."

"What! to bewitch me as thou didst my poor son and daughter, and
well-nigh my lord himself!  Girl!  Girl!  Thou know'st I cannot burn
thee now; but away with thee; try not my patience too far."

And, more desolate than ever, the crushed and broken-hearted
Christina, a widow before she had been owned a wife, returned to the
room that was now so full of memories as to be even more home than
Master Gottfried's gallery at Ulm.



CHAPTER VIII:  PASSING THE OUBLIETTE



Who can describe the dreariness of being snowed-up all the winter
with such a mother-in-law as Freiherrinn Kunigunde?

Yet it was well that the snow came early, for it was the best defence
of the lonely castle from any attack on the part of the
Schlangenwaldern, the Swabian League, or the next heir, Freiherr
Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss.  The elder Baroness had, at
least, the merit of a stout heart, and, even with her sadly-reduced
garrison, feared none of them.  She had been brought up in the faith
that Adlerstein was impregnable, and so she still believed; and, if
the disaster that had cut off her husband and son was to happen at
all, she was glad that it had befallen before the homage had been
paid.  Probably the Schlangenwald Count knew how tough a morsel the
castle was like to prove, and Wildschloss was serving at a distance,
for nothing was heard of either during the short interval while the
roads were still open.  During this time an attempt had been made
through Father Norbert to ascertain what had become of the corpses of
the two Barons and their followers, and it had appeared that the
Count had carried them all off from the inn, no doubt to adorn his
castle with their limbs, or to present them to the Emperor in
evidence of his zeal for order.  The old Baron could not indeed have
been buried in consecrated ground, nor have masses said for him; but
for the weal of her son's soul Dame Kunigunde gave some of her few
ornaments, and Christina added her gold earrings, and all her scanty
purse, that both her husband and father might be joined in the
prayers of the Church--trying with all her might to put confidence in
Hugh Sorel's Loretto relic, and the Indulgence he had bought, and
trusting with more consolatory thoughts to the ever stronger dawnings
of good she had watched in her own Eberhard.

She had some consoling intercourse with the priest while all this was
pending; but throughout the winter she was entirely cut off from
every creature save the inmates of the castle, where, as far as the
old lady was concerned, she only existed on sufferance, and all her
meekness and gentleness could not win for her more than the barest
toleration.

That Eberhard had for a few hours survived his father, and that thus
the Freiherrinn Christina was as much the Dowager Baroness as
Kunigunde herself, was often insisted on in the kitchen by Ursel,
Hatto, and the Schneiderlein, whom Christina had unconsciously
rendered her most devoted servant, not only by her daily care of his
wound, but by her kind courteous words, and by her giving him his
proper name of Heinz, dropping the absurd nom de guerre of the
Schneiderlein, or little tailor, which had been originally conferred
on him in allusion to the valiant Tailorling who boasted of having
killed seven flies at a blow, and had been carried on chiefly because
of the contradiction between such a title and his huge brawny
strength and fierce courage.  Poor Eberhard, with his undaunted
bravery and free reckless good-nature, a ruffian far more by
education than by nature, had been much loved by his followers.  His
widow would have reaped the benefit of that affection even if her
exceeding sweetness had not gained it on her own account; and this
giant was completely gained over to her, when, amid all her sorrow
and feebleness, she never failed to minister to his sufferings to the
utmost, while her questions about his original home, and revival of
the name of his childhood, softened him, and awoke in him better
feelings.  He would have died to serve her, and she might have headed
an opposition party in the castle, had she not been quite indifferent
to all save her grief; and, except by sitting above the salt at the
empty table, she laid no claim to any honours or authority, and was
more seldom than ever seen beyond what was now called her own room.

At last, when for the second time she was seeing the snow wreaths
dwindle, and the drops shine forth in moisture again, while the
mountain paths were set free by the might of the springtide sun, she
spoke almost for the first time with authority, as she desired Heinz
to saddle her mule, and escort her to join in the Easter mass at the
Blessed Friedmund's Chapel.  Ursel heaped up objections; but so
urgent was Christina for confession and for mass, that the old woman
had not the heart to stop her by a warning to the elder Baroness, and
took the alternative of accompanying her.  It was a glorious
sparkling Easter Day, lovely blue sky above, herbage and flowers
glistening below, snow dazzling in the hollows, peasants assembling
in holiday garb, and all rejoicing.  Even the lonely widow, in her
heavy veil and black mufflings, took hope back to her heart, and
smiled when at the church door a little child came timidly up to her
with a madder-tinted Easter egg--a gift once again like the happy
home customs of Ulm.  She gave the child a kiss--she had nothing else
to give, but the sweet face sent it away strangely glad.

The festival mass in all its exultation was not fully over, when
anxious faces began to be seen at the door, and whisperings went
round and many passed out.  Nobody at Adlerstein was particular about
silence in church, and, when the service was not in progress, voices
were not even lowered, and, after many attempts on the part of the
Schneiderlein to attract the attention of his mistress, his voice
immediately succeeded the Ite missa est, "Gracious lady, we must
begone.  Your mule is ready.  There is a party at the Debateable
Ford, whether Schlangenwald or Wildschloss we know not yet, but
either way you must be the first thing placed in safety."

Christina turned deadly pale.  She had long been ready to welcome
death as a peaceful friend; but, sheltered as her girlhood had been
in the quiet city, she had never been brought in contact with
warfare, and her nervous, timid temperament made the thought most
appalling and frightful to her, certain as she was that the old
Baroness would resist to the uttermost.  Father Norbert saw her
extreme terror, and, with the thought that he might comfort and
support her, perhaps mediate between the contending parties, plead
that it was holy-tide, and proclaim the peace of the church, or at
the worst protect the lady herself, he offered his company; but,
though she thanked him, it was as if she scarcely understood his
kindness, and a shudder passed over her whenever the serfs, hastily
summoned to augment the garrison, came hurrying down the path, or
turned aside into the more rugged and shorter descents.  It was
strange, the good father thought, that so timorous and fragile a
being should have her lot cast amid these rugged places and scenes of
violence, with no one to give her the care and cherishing she so much
required.

Even when she crept up the castle stairs, she was met with an angry
rebuke, not so much for the peril she had incurred as for having
taken away the Schneiderlein, by far the most availing among the
scanty remnant of the retainers of Adlerstein.  Attempting no answer,
and not even daring to ask from what quarter came the alarm,
Christina made her way out of the turmoil to that chamber of her own,
the scene of so much fear and sorrow, and yet of some share of peace
and happiness.  But from the window, near the fast subsiding waters
of the Debateable Ford, could plainly be seen the small troop of
warriors, of whom Jobst the Kohler had brought immediate
intelligence.  The sun glistened on their armour, and a banner
floated gaily on the wind; but they were a fearful sight to the
inmates of the lonely castle.

A stout heart was however Kunigunde's best endowment; and, with the
steadiness and precision of a general, her commands rang out, as she
arranged and armed her garrison, perfectly resolved against any
submission, and confident in the strength of her castle; nay, not
without a hope of revenge either against Schlangenwald or
Wildschloss, whom, as a degenerate Adlerstein, she hated only less
than the slayer of her husband and son.

The afternoon of Easter Day however passed away without any movement
on the part of the enemy, and it was not till the following day that
they could be seen struggling through the ford, and preparing to
ascend the mountain.  Attacks had sometimes been disconcerted by
posting men in the most dangerous passes; but, in the lack of
numbers, and of trustworthy commanders, the Freiherrinn had judged it
wiser to trust entirely to her walls, and keep her whole force within
them.

The new comers could hardly have had any hostile intentions, for,
though well armed and accoutred, their numbers did not exceed twenty-
five.  The banner borne at their head was an azure one, with a white
eagle, and their leader could be observed looking with amazement at
the top of the watch-tower, where the same eagle had that morning
been hoisted for the first time since the fall of the two Freiherren.

So soon as the ascent had been made, the leader wound his horn, and,
before the echoes had died away among the hills, Hatto, acting as
seneschal, was demanding his purpose.

"I am Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss," was the reply.  "I have
hitherto been hindered by stress of weather from coming to take
possession of my inheritance.  Admit me, that I may arrange with the
widowed Frau Freiherrinn as to her dower and residence."

"The widowed Frau Freiherrinn, born of Adlerstein," returned Hatto,
"thanks the Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss; but she holds the
castle as guardian to the present head of the family, the Freiherr
von Adlerstein."

"It is false, old man," exclaimed the Wildschloss; "the Freiherr had
no other son."

"No," said Hatto, "but Freiherr Eberhard hath left us twin heirs, our
young lords, for whom we hold this castle."

"This trifling will not serve!" sternly spoke the knight.  "Eberhard
von Adlerstein died unmarried."

"Not so," returned Hatto, "our gracious Frau Freiherrinn, the
younger, was wedded to him at the last Friedmund Wake, by the special
blessing of our good patron, who would not see our house extinct."

"I must see thy lady, old man," said Sir Kasimir, impatiently, not in
the least crediting the story, and believing his cousin Kunigunde
quite capable of any measure that could preserve to her the rule in
Schloss Adlerstein, even to erecting some passing love affair of her
son's into a marriage.  And he hardly did her injustice, for she had
never made any inquiry beyond the castle into the validity of
Christina's espousals, nor sought after the friar who had performed
the ceremony.  She consented to an interview with the claimant of the
inheritance, and descended to the gateway for the purpose.  The court
was at its cleanest, the thawing snow having newly washed away its
impurities, and her proud figure, under her black hood and veil, made
an imposing appearance as she stood tall and defiant in the archway.

Sir Kasimir was a handsome man of about thirty, of partly Polish
descent, and endowed with Slavonic grace and courtesy, and he had
likewise been employed in negotiations with Burgundy, and had
acquired much polish and knowledge of the world.

"Lady," he said, "I regret to disturb and intrude on a mourning
family, but I am much amazed at the tidings I have heard; and I must
pray of you to confirm them."

"I thought they would confound you," composedly replied Kunigunde.

"And pardon me, lady, but the Diet is very nice in requiring full
proofs.  I would be glad to learn what lady was chosen by my deceased
cousin Eberhard."

"The lady is Christina, daughter of his esquire, Hugh Sorel, of an
honourable family at Ulm."

"Ha!  I know who and what Sorel was!" exclaimed Wildschloss.  "Lady
cousin, thou wouldst not stain the shield of Adlerstein with owning
aught that cannot bear the examination of the Diet!"

"Sir Kasimir," said Kunigunde proudly, "had I known the truth ere my
son's death, I had strangled the girl with mine own hands!  But I
learnt it only by his dying confession; and, had she been a beggar's
child, she was his wedded wife, and her babes are his lawful heirs."

"Knowest thou time--place--witnesses?" inquired Sir Kasimir.

"The time, the Friedmund Wake; the place, the Friedmund Chapel,"
replied the Baroness.  "Come hither, Schneiderlein.  Tell the knight
thy young lord's confession."

He bore emphatic testimony to poor Eberhard's last words; but as to
the point of who had performed the ceremony, he knew not,--his mind
had not retained the name.

"I must see the Frau herself," said Wildschloss, feeling certain that
such a being as he expected in a daughter of the dissolute lanzknecht
Sorel would soon, by dexterous questioning, be made to expose the
futility of her pretensions so flagrantly that even Kunigunde could
not attempt to maintain them.

For one moment Kunigunde hesitated, but suddenly a look of malignant
satisfaction crossed her face.  She spoke a few words to Squinting
Matz, and then replied that Sir Kasimir should be allowed to satisfy
himself, but that she could admit no one else into the castle; hers
was a widow's household, the twins were only a few hours old, and she
could not open her gates to admit any person besides himself.

So resolved on judging for himself was Adlerstein Wildschloss that
all this did not stagger him; for, even if he had believed more than
he did of the old lady's story, there would have been no sense of
intrusion or impropriety in such a visit to the mother.  Indeed, had
Christina been living in the civilized world, her chamber would have
been hung with black cloth, black velvet would have enveloped her up
to the eyes, and the blackest of cradles would have stood ready for
her fatherless babe; two steps, in honour of her baronial rank, would
have led to her bed, and a beaufet with the due baronial amount of
gold and silver plate would have held the comfits and caudle to be
dispensed to all visitors.  As it was, the two steps built into the
floor of the room, and the black hood that Ursel tied over her young
mistress's head, were the only traces that such etiquette had ever
been heard of.

But when Baron Kasimir had clanked up the turret stairs, each step
bringing to her many a memory of him who should have been there, and
when he had been led to the bedside, he was completely taken by
surprise.

Instead of the great, flat-faced, coarse comeliness of a German
wench, treated as a lady in order to deceive him, he saw a delicate,
lily-like face, white as ivory, and the soft, sweet brown eyes under
their drooping lashes, so full of innocence and sad though thankful
content, that he felt as if the inquiries he came to make were almost
sacrilege.

He had seen enough of the world to know that no agent in a clumsy
imposition would look like this pure white creature, with her arm
encircling the two little swaddled babes, whose red faces and bald
heads alone were allowed to appear above their mummy-like wrappings;
and he could only make an obeisance lower and infinitely more
respectful than that with which he had favoured the Baroness nee 