von
Adlerstein, with a few words of inquiry and apology.

But Christina had her sons' rights to defend now, and she had far
more spirit to do so than ever she had had in securing her own
position, and a delicate rose tint came into her cheek as she said in
her soft voice, "The Baroness tells me, that you, noble sir, would
learn who wedded me to my dear and blessed lord, Sir Eberhard.  It
was Friar Peter of the Franciscan brotherhood of Offingen, an agent
for selling indulgences.  Two of his lay brethren were present.  My
dear lord gave his own name and mine in full after the holy rite; the
friar promising his testimony if it were needed.  He is to be found,
or at least heard of, at his own cloister; and the hermit at the
chapel likewise beheld a part of the ceremony."

"Enough, enough, lady," replied Sir Kasimir; "forgive me for having
forced the question upon you."

"Nay," replied Christina, with her blush deepening, "it is but just
and due to us all;" and her soft eyes had a gleam of exultation, as
she looked at the two little mummies that made up the US--"I would
have all inquiries made in full."

"They shall be made, lady, as will be needful for the establishment
of your son's right as a free Baron of the empire, but not with any
doubt on my part, or desire to controvert that right.  I am fully
convinced, and only wish to serve you and my little cousins.  Which
of them is the head of our family?" he added, looking at the two
absolutely undistinguishable little chrysalises, so exactly alike
that Christina herself was obliged to look for the black ribbon, on
which a medal had been hung, round the neck of the elder.  Sir
Kasimir put one knee to the ground as he kissed the red cheek of the
infant and the white hand of the mother.

"Lady cousin," he said to Kunigunde, who had stood by all this time
with an anxious, uneasy, scowling expression on her face, "I am
satisfied.  I own this babe as the true Freiherr von Adlerstein, and
far be it from me to trouble his heritage.  Rather point out the way
in which I may serve you and him.  Shall I represent all to the
Emperor, and obtain his wardship, so as to be able to protect you
from any attacks by the enemies of the house?"

"Thanks, sir," returned the elder lady, severely, seeing Christina's
gratified, imploring face.  "The right line of Adlerstein can take
care of itself without greedy guardians appointed by usurpers.  Our
submission has never been made, and the Emperor cannot dispose of our
wardship."

And Kunigunde looked defiant, regarding herself and her grandson as
quite as good as the Emperor, and ready to blast her daughter-in-law
with her eyes for murmuring gratefully and wistfully, "Thanks, noble
sir, thanks!"

"Let me at least win a friendly right in my young cousins," said Sir
Kasimir, the more drawn by pitying admiration towards their mother,
as he perceived more of the grandmother's haughty repulsiveness and
want of comprehension of the dangers of her position.  "They are not
baptized?  Let me become their godfather."

Christina's face was all joy and gratitude, and even the grandmother
made no objection; in fact, it was the babes' only chance of a noble
sponsor; and Father Norbert, who had already been making ready for
the baptism, was sent for from the hall.  Kunigunde, meantime, moved
about restlessly, went half-way down the stairs, and held council
with some one there; Ursel likewise, bustled about, and Sir Kasimir
remained seated on the chair that had been placed for him near
Christina's bed.

She was able again to thank him, and add, "It may be that you will
have more cause than the lady grandmother thinks to remember your
offer of protection to my poor orphans.  Their father and grandfather
were, in very deed, on their way to make submission."

"That is well known to me," said Sir Kasimir.  "Lady, I will do all
in my power for you.  The Emperor shall hear the state of things;
and, while no violence is offered to travellers," he added, lowering
his tone, "I doubt not he will wait for full submission till this
young Baron be of age to tender it."

"We are scarce in force to offer violence," said Christina sighing.
"I have no power to withstand the Lady Baroness.  I am like a
stranger here; but, oh! sir, if the Emperor and Diet will be patient
and forbearing with this desolate house, my babes, if they live,
shall strive to requite their mercy by loyalty.  And the blessing of
the widow and fatherless will fall on you, most generous knight," she
added, fervently, holding out her hand.

"I would I could do more for you," said the knight.  "Ask, and all I
can do is at your service."

"Ah, sir," cried Christina, her eyes brightening, "there is one most
inestimable service you could render me--to let my uncle, Master
Gottfried, the wood-carver of Ulm, know where I am, and of my state,
and of my children."

Sir Kasimir repeated the name.

"Yes," she said.  "There was my home, there was I brought up by my
dear uncle and aunt, till my father bore me away to attend on the
young lady here.  It is eighteen months since they had any tidings
from her who was as a daughter to them."

"I will see them myself," said Kasimir; "I know the name.  Carved not
Master Gottfried the stall-work at Augsburg?"

"Yes, indeed!  In chestnut leaves!  And the Misereres all with fairy
tales!" exclaimed Christina.  "Oh, sir, thanks indeed!  Bear to the
dear, dear uncle and aunt their child's duteous greetings, and tell
them she loves them with all her heart, and prays them to forgive
her, and to pray for her and her little ones!  And," she added, "my
uncle may not have learnt how his brother, my father, died by his
lord's side.  Oh! pray him, if ever he loved his little Christina, to
have masses sung for my father and my own dear lord."

As she promised, Ursel came to make the babes ready for their
baptism, and Sir Kasimir moved away towards the window.  Ursel was
looking uneasy and dismayed, and, as she bent over her mistress, she
whispered, "Lady, the Schneiderlein sends you word that Matz has
called him to help in removing the props of the door you wot of when
HE yonder steps across it.  He would know if it be your will?"

"The oubliette!"  This was Frau Kunigunde's usage of the relative who
was doing his best for the welfare of her grandsons!  Christina's
whole countenance looked so frozen with horror, that Ursel felt as if
she had killed her on the spot; but the next moment a flash of relief
came over the pale features, and the trembling lip commanded itself
to say, "My best thanks to good Heinz.  Say to him that I forbid it.
If he loves the life of his master's children, he will abstain!  Tell
him so.  My blessings on him if this knight leave the castle safe,
Ursel." And her terrified earnest eyes impelled Ursel to hasten to do
her bidding; but whether it had been executed, there was no knowing,
for almost immediately the Freiherrinn and Father Norbert entered,
and Ursel returned with them.  Nay, the message given, who could tell
if Heinz would be able to act upon it?  In the ordinary condition of
the castle, he was indeed its most efficient inmate; Matz did not
approach him in strength, Hans was a cripple, Hatto would be on the
right side; but Jobst the Kohler, and the other serfs who had been
called in for the defence, were more likely to hold with the elder
than the younger lady.  And Frau Kunigunde herself, knowing well that
the five-and-twenty men outside would be incompetent to avenge their
master, confident in her narrow-minded, ignorant pride that no one
could take Schloss Adlerstein, and incapable of understanding the
changes in society that were rendering her isolated condition
untenable, was certain to scout any representation of the dire
consequences that the crime would entail.  Kasimir had no near
kindred, and private revenge was the only justice the Baroness
believed in; she only saw in her crime the satisfaction of an old
feud, and the union of the Wildschloss property with the parent stem.

Seldom could such a christening have taken place as that of which
Christina's bed-room was the scene--the mother scarcely able even to
think of the holy sacrament for the horror of knowing that the one
sponsor was already exulting in the speedy destruction of the other;
and, poor little feeble thing, rallying the last remnants of her
severely-tried powers to prevent the crime at the most terrible of
risks.

The elder babe received from his grandmother the hereditary name of
Eberhard, but Sir Kasimir looked at the mother inquiringly, ere he
gave the other to the priest.  Christina had well-nigh said,
"Oubliette," but, recalling herself in time, she feebly uttered the
name she had longed after from the moment she had known that two sons
had been her Easter gift, "Gottfried," after her beloved uncle.  But
Kunigunde caught the sound, and exclaimed, "No son of Adlerstein
shall bear abase craftsman's name.  Call him Racher (the avenger);"
and in the word there already rang a note of victory and revenge that
made Christina's blood run cold.  Sir Kasimir marked her trouble.
"The lady mother loves not the sound," he said, kindly.  "Lady, have
you any other wish?  Then will I call him Friedmund."

Christina had almost smiled.  To her the omen was of the best.  Baron
Friedmund had been the last common ancestor of the two branches of
the family, the patron saint was so called, his wake was her wedding-
day, the sound of the word imported peace, and the good Barons Ebbo
and Friedel had ever been linked together lovingly by popular memory.
And so the second little Baron received the name of Friedmund, and
then the knight of Wildschloss, perceiving, with consideration rare
in a warrior, that the mother looked worn out and feverish, at once
prepared to kiss her hand and take leave.

"One more favour, Sir Knight," she said, lifting up her head, while a
burning spot rose on either cheek.  "I beg of you to take my two
babes down--yes, both, both, in your own arms, and show them to your
men, owning them as your kinsmen and godsons."

Sir Kasimir looked exceedingly amazed, as if he thought the lady's
senses taking leave of her, and Dame Kunigunde broke out into
declarations that it was absurd, and she did not know what she was
talking of; but she repeated almost with passion, "Take them, take
them, you know not how much depends on it."  Ursel, with unusual
readiness of wit, signed and whispered that the young mother must be
humoured, for fear of consequences; till the knight, in a good-
natured, confused way, submitted to receive the two little bundles in
his arms, while he gave place to Kunigunde, who hastily stepped
before him in a manner that made Christina trust that her precaution
would be effectual.

The room was reeling round with her.  The agony of those few minutes
was beyond all things unspeakable.  What had seemed just before like
a certain way of saving the guest without real danger to her
children, now appeared instead the most certain destruction to all,
and herself the unnatural mother who had doomed her new-born babes
for a stranger's sake.  She could not even pray; she would have
shrieked to have them brought back, but her voice was dead within
her, her tongue clave to the roof of her mouth, ringings in her ears
hindered her even from listening to the descending steps.  She lay as
one dead, when ten minutes afterwards the cry of one of her babes
struck on her ear, and the next moment Ursel stood beside her, laying
them down close to her, and saying exultingly, "Safe! safe out at the
gate, and down the hillside, and my old lady ready to gnaw off her
hands for spite!"



CHAPTER IX:  THE EAGLETS



Christina's mental and bodily constitution had much similarity--
apparently most delicate, tender, and timid, yet capable of a vigour,
health, and endurance that withstood shocks that might have been
fatal to many apparently stronger persons.  The events of that
frightful Easter Monday morning did indeed almost kill her; but the
effects, though severe, were not lasting; and by the time the last of
Ermentrude's snow-wreath had vanished, she was sunning her babes at
the window, happier than she had ever thought to be--above all, in
the possession of both the children.  A nurse had been captured for
the little Baron from the village on the hillside; but the woman had
fretted, the child had pined, and had been given back to his mother
to save his life; and ever since both had thriven perfectly under her
sole care, so that there was very nearly joy in that room.

Outside it, there was more bitterness than ever.  The grandmother had
softened for a few moments at the birth of the children, with
satisfaction at obtaining twice as much as she had hoped; but the
frustration of her vengeance upon Kasimir of Adlerstein Wildschloss
had renewed all her hatred, and she had no scruple in abusing "the
burgher-woman" to the whole household for her artful desire to
captivate another nobleman.  She, no doubt, expected that degenerate
fool of a Wildschlosser to come wooing after her; "if he did he
should meet his deserts."  It was the favourite reproach whenever she
chose to vent her fury on the mute, blushing, weeping young widow,
whose glance at her babies was her only appeal against the cruel
accusation.

On Midsummer eve, Heinz the Schneiderlein, who had all day been
taking toll from the various attendants at the Friedmund Wake, came
up and knocked at the door.  He had a bundle over his shoulder and a
bag in his hand, which last he offered to her.

"The toll!  It is for the Lady Baroness."

"You are my Lady Baroness.  I levy toll for this my young lord."

"Take it to her, good Heinz, she must have the charge, and needless
strife I will not breed."

The angry notes of Dame Kunigunde came up:  "How now, knave
Schneiderlein!  Come down with the toll instantly.  It shall not be
tampered with!  Down, I say, thou thief of a tailor."

"Go; prithee go, vex her not," entreated Christina.

"Coming, lady!" shouted Heinz, and, disregarding all further
objurgations from beneath, he proceeded to deposit his bundle, and
explain that it had been entrusted to him by a pedlar from Ulm, who
would likewise take charge of anything she might have to send in
return, and he then ran down just in time to prevent a domiciliary
visit from the old lady.

From Ulm!  The very sound was joy; and Christina with trembling hands
unfastened the cords and stitches that secured the canvas covering,
within which lay folds on folds of linen, and in the midst a rich
silver goblet, long ago brought by her father from Italy, a few of
her own possessions, and a letter from her uncle secured with black
floss silk, with a black seal.

She kissed it with transport, but the contents were somewhat chilling
by their grave formality.  The opening address to the "honour-worthy
Lady Baroness and love-worthy niece," conveyed to her a doubt on good
Master Gottfried's part whether she were still truly worthy of love
or honour.  The slaughter at Jacob Muller's had been already known to
him, and he expressed himself as relieved, but greatly amazed, at the
information he had received from the Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss,
who had visited him at Ulm, after having verified what had been
alleged at Schloss Adlerstein by application to the friar at
Offingen.

Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss had further requested him to make
known that, feud-briefs having regularly passed between Schlangenwald
and Adlerstein, and the two Barons not having been within the peace
of the empire, no justice could be exacted for their deaths; yet, in
consideration of the tender age of the present heirs, the question of
forfeiture or submission should be waived till they could act for
themselves, and Schlangenwald should be withheld from injuring them
so long as no molestation was offered to travellers.  It was plain
that Sir Kasimir had well and generously done his best to protect the
helpless twins, and he sent respectful but cordial greetings to their
mother.  These however were far less heeded by her than the coldness
of her uncle's letter.  She had drifted beyond the reckoning of her
kindred, and they were sending her her property and bridal linen, as
if they had done with her, and had lost their child in the robber-
baron's wife.  Yet at the end there was a touch of old times in
offering a blessing, should she still value it, and the hopes that
heaven and the saints would comfort her; "for surely, thou poor
child, thou must have suffered much, and, if thou wiliest still to
write to thy city kin, thine aunt would rejoice to hear that thou and
thy babes were in good health."

Precise grammarian and scribe as was Uncle Gottfried, the lapse from
the formal Sie to the familiar Du went to his niece's heart.
Whenever her little ones left her any leisure, she spent this her
first wedding-day in writing so earnest and loving a letter as, in
spite of mediaeval formality, must assure the good burgomaster that,
except in having suffered much and loved much, his little Christina
was not changed since she had left him.

No answer could be looked for till another wake-day; but, when it
came, it was full and loving, and therewith were sent a few more of
her favourite books, a girdle, and a richly-scented pair of gloves,
together with two ivory boxes of comfits, and two little purple silk,
gold-edged, straight, narrow garments and tight round brimless lace
caps, for the two little Barons.  Nor did henceforth a wake-day pass
by without bringing some such token, not only delightful as
gratifying Christina's affection by the kindness that suggested them,
but supplying absolute wants in the dire stress of poverty at Schloss
Adlerstein.

Christina durst not tell her mother-in-law of the terms on which they
were unmolested, trusting to the scantiness of the retinue, and to
her own influence with the Schneiderlein to hinder any serious
violence.  Indeed, while the Count of Schlangenwald was in the
neighbourhood, his followers took care to secure all that could be
captured at the Debateable Ford, and the broken forces of Adlerstein
would have been insane had they attempted to contend with such
superior numbers.  That the castle remained unattacked was attributed
by the elder Baroness to its own merits; nor did Christina undeceive
her.  They had no intercourse with the outer world, except that once
a pursuivant arrived with a formal intimation from their kinsman, the
Baron of Adlerstein Wildschloss, of his marriage with the noble
Fraulein, Countess Valeska von Trautbach, and a present of a gay
dagger for each of his godsons.  Frau Kunigunde triumphed a good deal
over the notion of Christina's supposed disappointment; but the
tidings were most welcome to the younger lady, who trusted they would
put an end to all future taunts about Wildschloss.  Alas! the handle
for abuse was too valuable to be relinquished.

The last silver cup the castle had possessed had to be given as a
reward to the pursuivant, and mayhap Frau Kunigunde reckoned this as
another offence of her daughter-in-law, since, had Sir Kasimir been
safe in the oubliette, the twins might have shared his broad lands on
the Danube, instead of contributing to the fees of his pursuivant.
The cup could indeed be ill spared.  The cattle and swine, the dues
of the serfs, and the yearly toll at the wake were the sole resources
of the household; and though there was no lack of meat, milk, and
black bread, sufficient garments could scarce be come by, with all
the spinning of the household, woven by the village webster, of whose
time the baronial household, by prescriptive right, owned the lion's
share.

These matters little troubled the two beings in whom Christina's
heart was wrapped up.  Though running about barefooted and
bareheaded, they were healthy, handsome, straight-limbed, noble-
looking creatures, so exactly alike, and so inseparable, that no one
except herself could tell one from the other save by the medal of Our
Lady worn by the elder, and the little cross carved by the mother for
the younger; indeed, at one time, the urchins themselves would feel
for cross or medal, ere naming themselves "Ebbo," or "Friedel."  They
were tall for their age, but with the slender make of their foreign
ancestry; and, though their fair rosy complexions were brightened by
mountain mists and winds, their rapidly darkening hair, and large
liquid brown eyes, told of their Italian blood.  Their grandmother
looked on their colouring as a taint, and Christina herself had hoped
to see their father's simple, kindly blue eyes revive in his boys;
but she could hardly have desired anything different from the
dancing, kindling, or earnest glances that used to flash from under
their long black lashes when they were nestling in her lap, or
playing by her knee, making music with their prattle, or listening to
her answers with faces alive with intelligence.  They scarcely left
her time for sorrow or regret.

They were never quarrelsome.  Either from the influence of her
gentleness, or from their absolute union, they could do and enjoy
nothing apart, and would as soon have thought of their right and left
hands falling out as of Ebbo and Friedel disputing.  Ebbo however was
always the right hand.  THE Freiherr, as he had been called from the
first, had, from the time he could sit at the table at all, been put
into the baronial chair with the eagle carved at the back; every
member of the household, from his grandmother downwards, placed him
foremost, and Friedel followed their example, at the less loss to
himself, as his hand was always in Ebbo's, and all their doings were
in common.  Sometimes however the mother doubted whether there would
have been this perfect absence of all contest had the medal of the
firstborn chanced to hang round Friedmund's neck instead of
Eberhard's.  At first they were entirely left to her.  Their
grandmother heeded them little as long as they were healthy, and
evidently regarded them more as heirs of Adlerstein than as
grandchildren; but, as they grew older, she showed anxiety lest their
mother should interfere with the fierce, lawless spirit proper to
their line.

One winter day, when they were nearly six years old, Christina,
spinning at her window, had been watching them snowballing in the
castle court, smiling and applauding every large handful held up to
her, every laughing combat, every well-aimed hit, as the hardy little
fellows scattered the snow in showers round them, raising their merry
fur-capped faces to the bright eyes that "rained influence and judged
the prize."

By and by they stood still; Ebbo--she knew him by the tossed head and
commanding air--was proposing what Friedel seemed to disapprove; but,
after a short discussion, Ebbo flung away from him, and went towards
a shed where was kept a wolf-cub, recently presented to the young
Barons by old Ulrich's son.  The whelp was so young as to be quite
harmless, but it was far from amiable; Friedel never willingly
approached it, and the snarling and whining replies to all advances
had begun to weary and irritate Ebbo.  He dragged it out by its
chain, and, tethering it to a post, made it a mark for his snowballs,
which, kneaded hard, and delivered with hearty good-will by his
sturdy arms, made the poor little beast yelp with pain and terror,
till the more tender-hearted Friedel threw himself on his brother to
withhold him, while Matz stood by laughing and applauding the Baron.
Seeing Ebbo shake Friedel off with unusual petulance, and pitying the
tormented animal, Christina flung a cloak round her head and hastened
down stairs, entering the court just as the terrified whelp had made
a snap at the boy, which was returned by angry, vindictive pelting,
not merely with snow, but with stones.  Friedel sprang to her crying,
and her call to Ebbo made him turn, though with fury in his face,
shouting, "He would bite me! the evil beast!"

"Come with me, Ebbo," she said.

"He shall suffer for it, the spiteful, ungrateful brute!  Let me
alone, mother!" cried Ebbo, stamping on the snow, but still from
habit yielding to her hand on his shoulder.

"What now?" demanded the old Baroness, appearing on the scene.  "Who
is thwarting the Baron?"

"She; she will not let me deal with yonder savage whelp," cried the
boy.

"She!  Take thy way, child," said the old lady.  "Visit him well for
his malice.  None shall withstand thee here.  At thy peril!" she
added, turning on Christina.  "What, art not content to have brought
base mechanical blood into a noble house?  Wouldst make slaves and
cowards of its sons?"

"I would teach them true courage, not cruelty," she tried to say.

"What should such as thou know of courage?  Look here, girl:  another
word to daunt the spirit of my grandsons, and I'll have thee scourged
down the mountain-side!  On!  At him, Ebbo!  That's my gallant young
knight!  Out of the way, girl, with thy whining looks!  What,
Friedel, be a man, and aid thy brother!  Has she made thee a puling
woman already?"  And Kunigunde laid an ungentle grasp upon Friedmund,
who was clinging to his mother, hiding his face in her gown.  He
struggled against the clutch, and would not look up or be detached.

"Fie, poor little coward!" taunted the old lady; "never heed him,
Ebbo, my brave Baron!"

Cut to the heart, Christina took refuge in her room, and gathered her
Friedel to her bosom, as he sobbed out, "Oh, mother, the poor little
wolf!  Oh, mother, are you weeping too?  The grandmother should not
so speak to the sweetest, dearest motherling," he added, throwing his
arms round her neck.

"Alas, Friedel, that Ebbo should learn that it is brave to hurt the
weak!"

"It is not like Walther of Vogelwiede," said Friedel, whose mind had
been much impressed by the Minnesinger's bequest to the birds.

"Nor like any true Christian knight.  Alas, my poor boys, must you be
taught foul cruelty and I too weak and cowardly to save you?"

"That never will be," said Friedel, lifting his head from her
shoulder.  "Hark! what a howl was that!"

"Listen not, dear child; it does but pain thee."

"But Ebbo is not shouting.  Oh, mother, he is vexed--he is hurt!"
cried Friedel, springing from her lap; but, ere either could reach
the window, Ebbo had vanished from the scene.  They only saw the
young wolf stretched dead on the snow, and the same moment in burst
Ebbo, and flung himself on the floor in a passion of weeping.
Stimulated by the applause of his grandmother and of Matz, he had
furiously pelted the poor animal with all missiles that came to hand,
till a blow, either from him or Matz, had produced such a howl and
struggle of agony, and then such terrible stillness, as had gone to
the young Baron's very heart, a heart as soft as that of his father
had been by nature.  Indeed, his sobs were so piteous that his mother
was relieved to hear only, "The wolf! the poor wolf!" and to find
that he himself was unhurt; and she was scarcely satisfied of this
when Dame Kunigunde came up also alarmed, and thus turned his grief
to wrath.  "As if I would cry in that way for a bite!" he said.  "Go,
grandame; you made me do it, the poor beast!" with a fresh sob.

"Ulrich shall get thee another cub, my child."

"No, no; I never will have another cub!  Why did you let me kill it?"

"For shame, Ebbo!  Weep for a spiteful brute!  That's no better than
thy mother or Friedel."

"I love my mother!  I love Friedel!  They would have withheld me.
Go, go; I hate you!"

"Peace, peace, Ebbo," exclaimed his mother; "you know not what you
say.  Ask your grandmother's pardon."

"Peace, thou fool!" screamed the old lady.  "The Baron speaks as he
will in his own castle.  He is not to be checked here, and thwarted
there, and taught to mince his words like a cap-in-hand pedlar.
Pardon!  When did an Adlerstein seek pardon?  Come with me, my Baron;
I have still some honey-cakes."

"Not I," replied Ebbo; "honey-cakes will not cure the wolf whelp.
Go:  I want my mother and Friedel."

Alone with them his pride and passion were gone; but alas! what
augury for the future of her boys was left with the mother!



CHAPTER X:  THE EAGLE'S PREY



"It fell about the Lammas tide,
When moor men win their hay,"

that all the serfs of Adlerstein were collected to collect their
lady's hay to be stored for the winter's fodder of the goats, and of
poor Sir Eberhard's old white mare, the only steed as yet ridden by
the young Barons.

The boys were fourteen years old.  So monotonous was their mother's
life that it was chiefly their growth that marked the length of her
residence in the castle.  Otherwise there had been no change, except
that the elder Baroness was more feeble in her limbs, and still more
irritable and excitable in temper.  There were no events, save a few
hunting adventures of the boys, or the yearly correspondence with
Ulm; and the same life continued, of shrinking in dread from the old
lady's tyrannous dislike, and of the constant endeavour to infuse
better principles into the boys, without the open opposition for
which there was neither power nor strength.

The boys' love was entirely given to their mother.  Far from
diminishing with their dependence on her, it increased with the sense
of protection; and, now that they were taller than herself, she
seemed to be cherished by them more than ever.  Moreover, she was
their oracle.  Quick-witted and active-minded, loving books the more
because their grandmother thought signing a feud-letter the utmost
literary effort becoming to a noble, they never rested till they had
acquired all that their mother could teach them; or, rather, they
then became more restless than ever.  Long ago had her whole store of
tales and ballads become so familiar, by repetition, that the boys
could correct her in the smallest variation; reading and writing were
mastered as for pleasure; and the Nuremberg Chronicle, with its
wonderful woodcuts, excited such a passion of curiosity that they
must needs conquer its Latin and read it for themselves.  This World
History, with Alexander and the Nine Worthies, the cities and
landscapes, and the oft-repeated portraits, was Eberhard's study; but
Friedmund continued--constant to Walther of Vogelweide.  Eberhard
cared for no character in the Vulgate so much as for Judas the
Maccabee; but Friedmund's heart was all for King David; and to both
lads, shut up from companionship as they were, every acquaintance in
their books was a living being whose like they fancied might be met
beyond their mountain.  And, when they should go forth, like Dietrich
of Berne, in search of adventures, doughty deeds were chiefly to fall
to the lot of Ebbo's lance; while Friedel was to be their
Minnesinger; and indeed certain verses, that he had murmured in his
brother's ear, had left no doubt in Ebbo's mind that the exploits
would be worthily sung.

The soft dreamy eye was becoming Friedel's characteristic, as fire
and keenness distinguished his brother's glance.  When at rest, the
twins could be known apart by their expression, though in all other
respects they were as alike as ever; and let Ebbo look thoughtful or
Friedel eager and they were again undistinguishable; and indeed they
were constantly changing looks.  Had not Friedel been beside him,
Ebbo would have been deemed a wondrous student for his years; had not
Ebbo been the standard of comparison, Friedel would have been in high
repute for spirit and enterprise and skill as a cragsman, with the
crossbow, and in all feats of arms that the Schneiderlein could
impart.  They shared all occupations; and it was by the merest shade
that Ebbo excelled with the weapon, and Friedel with the book or
tool.  For the artist nature was in them, not intentionally excited
by their mother, but far too strong to be easily discouraged.  They
had long daily gazed at Ulm in the distance, hoping to behold the
spire completed; and the illustrations in their mother's books
excited a strong desire to imitate them.  The floor had often been
covered with charcoal outlines even before Christina was persuaded to
impart the rules she had learnt from her uncle; and her carving-tools
were soon seized upon.  At first they were used only upon knobs of
sticks; but one day when the boys, roaming on the mountain, had lost
their way, and coming to the convent had been there hospitably
welcomed by Father Norbert, they came home wild to make carvings like
what they had seen in the chapel.  Jobst the Kohler was continually
importuned for soft wood; the fair was ransacked for knives; and even
the old Baroness could not find great fault with the occupation, base
and mechanical though it were, which disposed of the two restless
spirits during the many hours when winter storms confined them to the
castle.  Rude as was their work, the constant observation and choice
of subjects were an unsuspected training and softening.  It was not
in vain that they lived in the glorious mountain fastness, and saw
the sun descend in his majesty, dyeing the masses of rock with purple
and crimson; not in vain that they beheld peak and ravine clothed in
purest snow, flushed with rosy light at morn and eve, or contrasted
with the purple blue of the sky; or that they stood marvelling at ice
caverns with gigantic crystal pendants shining with the most magical
pure depths of sapphire and emerald, "as if," said Friedel, "winter
kept in his service all the jewel-forging dwarfs of the motherling's
tales." And, when the snow melted and the buds returned, the ivy
spray, the smiling saxifrage, the purple gentian bell, the feathery
rowan leaf, the symmetrical lady's mantle, were hailed and loved
first as models, then for themselves.

One regret their mother had, almost amounting to shame.  Every
virtuous person believed in the efficacy of the rod, and, maugre her
own docility, she had been chastised with it almost as a religious
duty; but her sons had never felt the weight of a blow, except once
when their grandmother caught them carving a border of eagles and
doves round the hall table, and then Ebbo had returned the blow with
all his might.  As to herself, if she ever worked herself up to
attempt chastisement, the Baroness was sure to fall upon her for
insulting the noble birth of her sons, and thus gave them a triumph
far worse for them than impunity.  In truth, the boys had their own
way, or rather the Baron had his way, and his way was Baron
Friedmund's.  Poor, bare, and scanty as were all the surroundings of
their life, everything was done to feed their arrogance, with only
one influence to counteract their education in pride and violence--a
mother's influence, indeed, but her authority was studiously taken
from her, and her position set at naught, with no power save what she
might derive from their love and involuntary honour, and the sight of
the pain caused her by their wrong-doings.

And so the summer's hay-harvest was come.  Peasants clambered into
the green nooks between the rocks to cut down with hook or knife the
flowery grass, for there was no space for the sweep of a scythe.  The
best crop was on the bank of the Braunwasser, by the Debateable Ford,
but this was cut and carried on the backs of the serfs, much earlier
than the mountain grass, and never without much vigilance against the
Schlangenwaldern; but this year the Count was absent at his Styrian
castle, and little had been seen or heard of his people.

The full muster of serfs appeared, for Frau Kunigunde admitted of no
excuses, and the sole absentee was a widow who lived on the ledge of
the mountain next above that on which the castle stood.  Her son
reported her to be very ill, and with tears in his eyes entreated
Baron Friedel to obtain leave for him to return to her, since she was
quite alone in her solitary hut, with no one even to give her a drink
of water.  Friedel rushed with the entreaty to his grandmother, but
she laughed it to scorn.  Lazy Koppel only wanted an excuse, or, if
not, the woman was old and useless, and men could not be spared.

"Ah! good grandame," said Friedel, "his father died with ours."

"The more honour for him!  The more he is bound to work for us.  Off,
junker, make no loiterers."

Grieved and discomfited, Friedel betook himself to his mother and
brother.

"Foolish lad not to have come to me!" said the young Baron.  "Where
is he?  I'll send him at once."

But Christina interposed an offer to go and take Koppel's place
beside his mother, and her skill was so much prized over all the
mountain-side, that the alternative was gratefully accepted, and she
was escorted up the steep path by her two boys to the hovel, where
she spent the day in attendance on the sick woman.

Evening came on, the patient was better, but Koppel did not return,
nor did the young Barons come to fetch their mother home.  The last
sunbeams were dying off the mountain-tops, and, beginning to suspect
something amiss, she at length set off, and half way down met Koppel,
who replied to her question, "Ah, then, the gracious lady has not
heard of our luck.  Excellent booty, and two prisoners!  The young
Baron has been a hero indeed, and has won himself a knightly steed."
And, on her further interrogation, he added, that an unusually rich
but small company had been reported by Jobst the Kohler to be on the
way to the ford, where he had skilfully prepared a stumbling-block.
The gracious Baroness had caused Hatto to jodel all the hay-makers
together, and they had fallen on the travellers by the straight path
down the crag.  "Ach! did not the young Baron spring like a young
gemsbock?  And in midstream down came their pack-horses and their
wares!  Some of them took to flight, but, pfui, there were enough for
my young lord to show his mettle upon.  Such a prize the saints have
not sent since the old Baron's time."

Christina pursued her walk in dismay at this new beginning of
freebooting in its worst form, overthrowing all her hopes.  The best
thing that could happen would be the immediate interference of the
Swabian League, while her sons were too young to be personally held
guilty.  Yet this might involve ruin and confiscation; and, apart
from all consequences, she bitterly grieved that the stain of robbery
should have fallen on her hitherto innocent sons.

Every peasant she met greeted her with praises of their young lord,
and, when she mounted the hall-steps, she found the floor strewn with
bales of goods.

"Mother," cried Ebbo, flying up to her, "have you heard?  I have a
horse! a spirited bay, a knightly charger, and Friedel is to ride him
by turns with me.  Where is Friedel?  And, mother, Heinz said I
struck as good a stroke as any of them, and I have a sword for
Friedel now.  Why does he not come?  And, motherling, this is for
you, a gown of velvet, a real black velvet, that will make you fairer
than our Lady at the Convent.  Come to the window and see it, mother
dear."

The boy was so joyously excited that she could hardly withstand his
delight, but she did not move.

"Don't you like the velvet?" he continued.  "We always said that, the
first prize we won, the motherling should wear velvet.  Do but look
at it."

"Woe is me, my Ebbo!" she sighed, bending to kiss his brow.

He understood her at once, coloured, and spoke hastily and in
defiance.  "It was in the river, mother, the horses fell; it is our
right."

"Fairly, Ebbo?" she asked in a low voice.

"Nay, mother, if Jobst DID hide a branch in midstream, it was no
doing of mine; and the horses fell.  The Schlangenwaldern don't even
wait to let them fall.  We cannot live, if we are to be so nice and
dainty."

"Ah! my son, I thought not to hear you call mercy and honesty mere
niceness."

"What do I hear?" exclaimed Frau Kunigunde, entering from the
storeroom, where she had been disposing of some spices, a much
esteemed commodity.  "Are you chiding and daunting this boy, as you
have done with the other?"

"My mother may speak to me!" cried Ebbo, hotly, turning round.

"And quench thy spirit with whining fooleries!  Take the Baron's
bounty, woman, and vex him not after his first knightly exploit."

"Heaven knows, and Ebbo knows," said the trembling Christina, "that,
were it a knightly exploit, I were the first to exult."

"Thou! thou craftsman's girl! dost presume to call in question the
knightly deeds of a noble house!  There!" cried the furious Baroness,
striking her face.  Now! dare to be insolent again."  Her hand was
uplifted for another blow, when it was grasped by Eberhard, and, the
next moment, he likewise held the other hand, with youthful strength
far exceeding hers.  She had often struck his mother before, but not
in his presence, and the greatness of the shock seemed to make him
cool and absolutely dignified.

"Be still, grandame," he said.  "No, mother, I am not hurting her,"
and indeed the surprise seemed to have taken away her rage and
volubility, and unresistingly she allowed him to seat her in a chair.
Still holding her arm, he made his clear boyish voice resound through
the hall, saying, "Retainers all, know that, as I am your lord and
master, so is my honoured mother lady of the castle, and she is never
to be gainsay'ed, let her say or do what she will."

"You are right, Herr Freiherr," said Heinz.  "The Frau Christina is
our gracious and beloved dame.  Long live the Freiherrinn Christina!"
And the voices of almost all the serfs present mingled in the cry.

"And hear you all," continued Eberhard, "she shall rule all, and
never be trampled on more.  Grandame, you understand?"

The old woman seemed confounded, and cowered in her chair without
speaking.  Christina, almost dismayed by this silence, would have
suggested to Ebbo to say something kind or consoling; but at that
moment she was struck with alarm by his renewed inquiry for his
brother.

"Friedel!  Was not he with thee?"

"No; I never saw him!"

Ebbo flew up the stairs, and shouted for his brother; then, coming
down, gave orders for the men to go out on the mountain-side, and
search and jodel.  He was hurrying with them, but his mother caught
his arm.  "O Ebbo, how can I let you go?  It is dark, and the crags
are so perilous!"

"Mother, I cannot stay!" and the boy flung his arms round her neck,
and whispered in her ear, "Friedel said it would be a treacherous
attack, and I called him a craven.  Oh, mother, we never parted thus
before!  He went up the hillside.  Oh, where is he?"

Infected by the boy's despairing voice, yet relieved that Friedel at
least had withstood the temptation, Christina still held Ebbo's hand,
and descended the steps with him.  The clear blue sky was fast
showing the stars, and into the evening stillness echoed the loud
wide jodeln, cast back from the other side of the ravine.  Ebbo tried
to raise his voice, but broke down in the shout, and, choked with
agitation, said, "Let me go, mother.  None know his haunts as I do!"

"Hark!" she said, only grasping him tighter.

Thinner, shriller, clearer came a far-away cry from the heights, and
Ebbo thrilled from head to foot, then sent up another pealing
mountain shout, responded to by a jodel so pitched as to be plainly
not an echo.  "Towards the Red Eyrie," said Hans.

"He will have been to the Ptarmigan's Pool," said Ebbo, sending up
his voice again, in hopes that the answer would sound less distant;
but, instead of this, its intonations conveyed, to these adepts in
mountain language, that Friedel stood in need of help.

"Depend upon it," said the startled Ebbo, "that he has got up amongst
those rocks where the dead chamois rolled down last summer; then, as
Christina uttered a faint cry of terror, Heinz added, "Fear not,
lady, those are not the jodeln of one who has met with a hurt.  Baron
Friedel has the sense to be patient rather than risk his bones if he
cannot move safely in the dark."

"Up after him!" said Ebbo, emitting a variety of shouts intimating
speedy aid, and receiving a halloo in reply that reassured even his
mother.  Equipped with a rope and sundry torches of pinewood, Heinz
and two of the serfs were speedily ready, and Christina implored her
son to let her come so far as where she should not impede the others.
He gave her his arm, and Heinz held his torch so as to guide her up a
winding path, not in itself very steep, but which she could never
have climbed had daylight shown her what it overhung.  Guided by the
constant exchange of jodeln, they reached a height where the wind
blew cold and wild, and Ebbo pointed to an intensely black shadow
overhung by a peak rising like the gable of a house into the sky.
"Yonder lies the tarn," he said.  "Don't stir.  This way lies the
cliff.  Fried-mund!" exchanging the jodel for the name.

"Here!--this way!  Under the Red Eyrie," called back the wanderer;
and steering their course round the rocks above the pool, the
rescuers made their way towards the base of the peak, which was in
fact the summit of the mountain, the top of the Eagle's Ladder, the
highest step of which they had attained.  The peak towered over them,
and beneath, the castle lights seemed as if it would be easy to let a
stone fall straight down on them.

Friedel's cry seemed to come from under their feet.  "I am here!  I
am safe; only it grew so dark that I durst not climb up or down."

The Schneiderlein explained that he would lower down a rope, which,
when fastened round Friedel's waist, would enable him to climb safely
up; and, after a breathless space, the torchlight shone upon the
longed-for face, and Friedel springing on the path, cried, "The
mother!--and here!" -

"Oh, Friedel, where have you been?  What is this in your arms?"

He showed them the innocent face of a little white kid.

"Whence is it, Friedel?"

He pointed to the peak, saying, "I was lying on my back by the tarn,
when my lady eagle came sailing overhead, so low that I could see
this poor little thing, and hear it bleat."

"Thou hast been to the Eyrie--the inaccessible Eyrie!" exclaimed
Ebbo, in amazement.

"That's a mistake.  It is not hard after the first" said Friedel.  "I
only waited to watch the old birds out again."

"Robbed the eagles!  And the young ones?"

"Well," said Friedmund, as if half ashamed, "they were twin eaglets,
and their mother had left them, and I felt as though I could not harm
them; so I only bore off their provisions, and stuck some feathers in
my cap.  But by that time the sun was down, and soon I could not see
my footing; and, when I found that I had missed the path, I thought I
had best nestle in the nook where I was, and wait for day.  I grieved
for my mother's fear; but oh, to see her here!"

"Ah, Friedel! didst do it to prove my words false?" interposed Ebbo,
eagerly.

"What words?"

"Thou knowest.  Make me not speak them again."

"Oh, those!" said Friedel, only now recalling them.  "No, verily;
they were but a moment's anger.  I wanted to save the kid.  I think
it is old mother Rika's white kid.  But oh, motherling!  I grieve to
have thus frightened you."

Not a single word passed between them upon Ebbo's exploits.  Whether
Friedel had seen all from the heights, or whether he intuitively
perceived that his brother preferred silence, he held his peace, and
both were solely occupied in assisting their mother down the pass,
the difficulties of which were far more felt now than in the
excitement of the ascent; only when they were near home, and the boys
were walking in the darkness with arms round one another's necks,
Christina heard Friedel say low and rather sadly, "I think I shall be
a priest, Ebbo."

To which Ebbo only answered, "Pfui!'

Christina understood that Friedel meant that robbery must be a
severance between the brothers.  Alas! had the moment come when their
paths must diverge?  Could Ebbo's step not be redeemed?

Ursel reported that Dame Kunigunde had scarcely spoken again, but had
retired, like one stunned, into her bed.  Friedel was half asleep
after the exertions of the day; but Ebbo did not speak, and both soon
betook themselves to their little turret chamber within their
mother's.

Christina prayed long that night, her heart full of dread of the
consequence of this transgression.  Rumours of freebooting castles
destroyed by the Swabian League had reached her every wake day, and,
if this outrage were once known, the sufferance that left Adlerstein
unmolested must be over.  There was hope indeed in the weakness and
uncertainty of the Government; but present safety would in reality be
the ruin of Ebbo, since he would be encouraged to persist in the
career of violence now unhappily begun.  She knew not what to ask,
save that her sons might be shielded from evil, and might fulfil that
promise of her dream, the star in heaven, the light on earth.  And
for the present!--the good God guide her and her sons through the
difficult morrow, and turn the heart of the unhappy old woman below!

When, exhausted with weeping and watching, she rose from her knees,
she stole softly into her sons' turret for a last look at them.
Generally they were so much alike in their sleep that even she was at
fault between them; but that night there was no doubt.  Friedel, pale
after the day's hunger and fatigue, slept with relaxed features in
the most complete calm; but though Ebbo's eyes were closed, there was
no repose in his face--his hair was tossed, his colour flushed, his
brow contracted, the arm flung across his brother had none of the
ease of sleep.  She doubted whether he were not awake; but, knowing
that he would not brook any endeavour to force confidence he did not
offer, she merely hung over them both, murmured a prayer and
blessing, and left them.



CHAPTER XI:  THE CHOICE IN LIFE



"Friedel, wake!"

"Is it day?" said Friedel, slowly wakening, and crossing himself as
he opened his eyes.  "Surely the sun is not up--?"

"We must be before the sun!" said Ebbo, who was on his feet,
beginning to dress himself.  "Hush, and come!  Do not wake the
mother.  It must be ere she or aught else be astir!  Thy prayers--I
tell thee this is a work as good as prayer."

Half awake, and entirely bewildered, Friedel dipped his finger in the
pearl mussel shell of holy water over their bed, and crossed his own
brow and his brother's; then, carrying their shoes, they crossed
their mother's chamber, and crept down stairs.  Ebbo muttered to his
brother, "Stand thou still there, and pray the saints to keep her
asleep;" and then, with bare feet, moved noiselessly behind the
wooden partition that shut off his grandmother's box-bedstead from
the rest of the hall.  She lay asleep with open mouth, snoring
loudly, and on her pillow lay the bunch of castle keys, that was
always carried to her at night.  It was a moment of peril when Ebbo
touched it; but he had nerved himself to be both steady and
dexterous, and he secured it without a jingle, and then, without
entering the hall, descended into a passage lit by a rough opening
cut in the rock.  Friedel, who began to comprehend, followed him
close and joyfully, and at the first door he fitted in, and with some
difficulty turned, a key, and pushed open the door of a vault, where
morning light, streaming through the grated window, showed two
captives, who had started to their feet, and now stood regarding the
pair in the doorway as if they thought their dreams were multiplying
the young Baron who had led the attack.

"Signori--" began the principal of the two; but Ebbo spoke.

"Sir, you have been brought here by a mistake in the absence of my
mother, the lady of the castle.  If you will follow me, I will
restore all that is within my reach, and put you on your way."

The merchant's knowledge of German was small, but the purport of the
words was plain, and he gladly left the damp, chilly vault.  Ebbo
pointed to the bales that strewed the hall.  "Take all that can be
carried," he said.  "Here is your sword, and your purse," he said,
for these had been given to him in the moment of victory.  "I will
bring out your horse and lead you to the pass."

"Give him food," whispered Friedel; but the merchant was too anxious
to have any appetite.  Only he faltered in broken German a proposal
to pay his respects to the Signora Castellana, to whom he owed so
much.

"No!  Dormit in lecto," said Ebbo, with a sudden inspiration caught
from the Latinized sound of some of the Italian words, but colouring
desperately as he spoke.

The Latin proved most serviceable, and the merchant understood that
his property was restored, and made all speed to gather it together,
and transport it to 