the stable.  One or two of his beasts of burden
had been lost in the fray, and there were more packages than could
well be carried by the merchant, his servant, and his horse.  Ebbo
gave the aid of the old white mare--now very white indeed--and in
truth the boys pitied the merchant's fine young bay for being put to
base trading uses, and were rather shocked to hear that it had been
taken in payment for a knight's branched velvet gown, and would be
sold again at Ulm.

"What a poor coxcomb of a knight!" said they to one another, as they
patted the creature's neck with such fervent admiration that the
merchant longed to present it to them, when he saw that the old white
mare was the sole steed they possessed, and watched their tender
guidance both of her and of the bay up the rocky path so familiar to
them.

"But ah, signorini miei, I am an infelice infelicissimo, ever
persecuted by le Fate."

"By whom?  A count like Schlangenwald?" asked Ebbo.

"Das Schicksal," whispered Friedel.

"Three long miserable years did I spend as a captive among the Moors,
having lost all, my ships and all I had, and being forced to row
their galleys, gli scomunicati."

"Galleys!" exclaimed Ebbo; "there are some pictured in our World
History before Carthage.  Would that I could see one!"

"The signorino would soon have seen his fill, were he between the
decks, chained to the bench for weeks together, without ceasing to
row for twenty-four hours together, with a renegade standing over to
lash us, or to put a morsel into our mouths if we were fainting."

"The dogs!  Do they thus use Christian men?" cried Friedel.

"Si, si--ja wohl.  There were a good fourscore of us, and among them
a Tedesco, a good man and true, from whom I learnt la lingua loro."

"Our tongue!--from whom?" asked one twin of the other.

"A Tedesco, a fellow-countryman of sue eccellenze."

"Deutscher!" cried both boys, turning in horror, "our Germans so
treated by the pagan villains?"

"Yea, truly, signorini miei.  This fellow-captive of mine was a
cavaliere in his own land, but he had been betrayed and sold by his
enemies, and he mourned piteously for la sposa sua--his bride, as
they say here.  A goodly man and a tall, piteously cramped in the
narrow deck, I grieved to leave him there when the good confraternita
at Genoa paid my ransom.  Having learnt to speak il Tedesco, and
being no longer able to fit out a vessel, I made my venture beyond
the Alps; but, alas! till this moment fortune has still been adverse.
My mules died of the toil of crossing the mountains; and, when with
reduced baggage I came to the river beneath there--when my horses
fell and my servants fled, and the peasants came down with their
hayforks--I thought myself in hands no better than those of the Moors
themselves."

"It was wrongly done," said Ebbo, in an honest, open tone, though
blushing.  "I have indeed a right to what may be stranded on the
bank, but never more shall foul means be employed for the overthrow."

The boys had by this time led the traveller through the Gemsbock's
Pass, within sight of the convent.  "There," said Ebbo, "will they
give you harbourage, food, a guide, and a beast to carry the rest of
your goods.  We are now upon convent land, and none will dare to
touch your bales; so I will unload old Schimmel."

"Ah, signorino, if I might offer any token of gratitude--"

"Nay," said Ebbo, with boyish lordliness, "make me not a spoiler."

"If the signorini should ever come to Genoa," continued the trader,
"and would honour Gian Battista dei Battiste with a call, his whole
house would be at their feet."

"Thanks; I would that we could see strange lands!" said Ebbo.  "But
come, Friedel, the sun is high, and I locked them all into the castle
to make matters safe."

"May the liberated captive know the name of his deliverers, that he
may commend it to the saints?" asked the merchant.

"I am Eberhard, Freiherr von Adlerstein, and this is Freiherr
Friedmund, my brother.  Farewell, sir."

"Strange," muttered the merchant, as he watched the two boys turn
down the pass, "strange how like one barbarous name is to another.
Eberardo!  That was what we called il Tedesco, and, when he once told
me his family name, it ended in stino; but all these foreign names
sound alike.  Let us speed on, lest these accursed peasants should
wake, and be beyond the control of the signorino."

"Ah!" sighed Ebbo, as soon as he had hurried out of reach of the
temptation, "small use in being a baron if one is to be no better
mounted!"

"Thou art glad to have let that fair creature go free, though," said
Friedel.

"Nay, my mother's eyes would let me have no rest in keeping him.
Otherwise--Talk not to me of gladness, Friedel!  Thou shouldst know
better.  How is one to be a knight with nothing to ride but a beast
old enough to be his grandmother?"

"Knighthood of the heart may be content to go afoot," said Friedel.
"Oh, Ebbo, what a brother thou art!  How happy the mother will be!"

"Pfui, Friedel; what boots heart without spur?  I am sick of being
mewed up here within these walls of rock!  No sport, not even with
falling on a traveller.  I am worse off than ever were my
forefathers!"

"But how is it?  I cannot understand," asked Friedel.  "What has
changed thy mind?"

"Thou, and the mother, and, more than all, the grandame.  Listen,
Friedel:  when thou camest up, in all the whirl of eagerness and glad
preparation, with thy grave face and murmur that Jobst had put forked
stakes in the stream, it was past man's endurance to be baulked of
the fray.  Thou hast forgotten what I said to thee then, good
Friedel?"

"Long since.  No doubt I thrust in vexatiously."

"Not so," said Ebbo; "and I saw thou hadst reason, for the stakes
were most maliciously planted, with long branches hid by the current;
but the fellows were showing fight, and I could not stay to think
then, or I should have seemed to fear them!  I can tell you we made
them run!  But I never meant the grandmother to put yon poor fellow
in the dungeon, and use him worse than a dog.  I wot that he was my
captive, and none of hers.  And then came the mother; and oh,
Friedel, she looked as if I were slaying her when she saw the spoil;
and, ere I had made her see right and reason, the old lady came
swooping down in full malice and spite, and actually came to blows.
She struck the motherling--struck her on the face, Friedel!"

"I fear me it has so been before," said Friedel, sadly.

"Never will it be so again," said Ebbo, standing still.  "I took the
old hag by the hands, and told her she had ruled long enough!  My
father's wife is as good a lady of the castle as my grandfather's,
and I myself am lord thereof; and, since my Lady Kunigunde chooses to
cross me and beat my mother about this capture, why she has seen the
last of it, and may learn who is master, and who is mistress!"

"Oh, Ebbo!  I would I had seen it!  But was not she outrageous?  Was
not the mother shrinking and ready to give back all her claims at
once?"

"Perhaps she would have been, but just then she found thou wast not
with me, and I found thou wast not with her, and we thought of nought
else.  But thou must stand by me, Friedel, and help to keep the
grandmother in her place, and the mother in hers."

"If the mother WILL be kept," said Friedel.  "I fear me she will only
plead to be left to the grandame's treatment, as before."

"Never, Friedel!  I will never see her so used again.  I released
this man solely to show that she is to rule here.--Yes, I know all
about freebooting being a deadly sin, and moreover that it will bring
the League about our ears; and it was a cowardly trick of Jobst to
put those branches in the stream.  Did I not go over it last night
till my brain was dizzy?  But still, it is but living and dying like
our fathers, and I hate tameness or dullness, and it is like a fool
to go back from what one has once begun."

"No; it is like a brave man, when one has begun wrong," said Friedel.

"But then I thought of the grandame triumphing over the gentle
mother--and I know the mother wept over her beads half the night.
She SHALL find she has had her own way for once this morning."

Friedel was silent for a few moments, then said, "Let me tell thee
what I saw yesterday, Ebbo."

"So," answered the other brother.

"I liked not to vex my mother by my tidings, so I climbed up to the
tarn.  There is something always healing in that spot, is it not so,
Ebbo?  When the grandmother has been raving" (hitherto Friedel's
worst grievance) "it is like getting up nearer the quiet sky in the
stillness there, when the sky seems to have come down into the deep
blue water, and all is so still, so wondrous still and calm.  I
wonder if, when we see the great Dome Kirk itself, it will give one's
spirit wings, as does the gazing up from the Ptarmigan's Pool."

"Thou minnesinger, was it the blue sky thou hadst to tell me of?"

"No, brother, it was ere I reached it that I saw this sight.  I had
scaled the peak where grows the stunted rowan, and I sat down to look
down on the other side of the gorge.  It was clear where I sat, but
the ravine was filled with clouds, and upon them--"

"The shape of the blessed Friedmund, thy patron?"

"OUR patron," said Friedel; "I saw him, a giant form in gown and
hood, traced in grey shadow upon the dazzling white cloud; and oh,
Ebbo! he was struggling with a thinner, darker, wilder shape bearing
a club.  He strove to withhold it; his gestures threatened and
warned!  I watched like one spell-bound, for it was to me as the
guardian spirit of our race striving for thee with the enemy."

"How did it end?"

"The cloud darkened, and swallowed them; nor should I have known the
issue, if suddenly, on the very cloud where the strife had been,
there had not beamed forth a rainbow--not a common rainbow, Ebbo, but
a perfect ring, a soft-glancing, many-tinted crown of victory.  Then
I knew the saint had won, and that thou wouldst win."

"I!  What, not thyself--his own namesake?"

"I thought, Ebbo, if the fight went very hard--nay, if for a time the
grandame led thee her way--that belike I might serve thee best by
giving up all, and praying for thee in the hermit's cave, or as a
monk."

"Thou!--thou, my other self!  Aid me by burrowing in a hole like a
rat!  What foolery wilt say next?  No, no, Friedel, strike by my
side, and I will strike with thee; pray by my side, and I will pray
with thee; but if thou takest none of the strokes, then will I none
of the prayers!"

"Ebbo, thou knowest not what thou sayest."

"No one knows better!  See, Friedel, wouldst thou have me all that
the old Adlersteinen were, and worse too? then wilt thou leave me and
hide thine head in some priestly cowl.  Maybe thou thinkest to pray
my soul into safety at the last moment as a favour to thine own
abundant sanctity; but I tell thee, Friedel, that's no manly way to
salvation.  If thou follow'st that track, I'll take care to get past
the border-line within which prayer can help."

Friedel crossed himself, and uttered an imploring exclamation of
horror at these wild words.

"Stay," said Ebbo; "I said not I meant any such thing--so long as
thou wilt be with me.  My purpose is to be a good man and true, a
guard to the weak, a defence against the Turk, a good lord to my
vassals, and, if it may not be otherwise, I will take my oath to the
Kaiser, and keep it.  Is that enough for thee, Friedel, or wouldst
thou see me a monk at once?"

"Oh, Ebbo, this is what we ever planned.  I only dreamed of the other
when--when thou didst seem to be on the other track."

"Well, what can I do more than turn back?  I'll get absolution on
Sunday, and tell Father Norbert that I will do any penance he
pleases; and warn Jobst that, if he sets any more traps in the river,
I will drown him there next!  Only get this priestly fancy away,
Friedel, once and for ever!"

"Never, never could I think of what would sever us," cried Friedel,
"save--when--" he added, hesitating, unwilling to harp on the former
string.  Ebbo broke in imperiously,

"Friedmund von Adlerstein, give me thy solemn word that I never again
hear of this freak of turning priest or hermit.  What! art slow to
speak?  Thinkest me too bad for thee?"

"No, Ebbo.  Heaven knows thou art stronger, more resolute than I.  I
am more likely to be too bad for thee.  But so long as we can be
true, faithful God-fearing Junkern together, Heaven forbid that we
should part!"

"It is our bond!" said Ebbo; "nought shall part us."

"Nought but death," said Friedmund, solemnly.

"For my part," said Ebbo, with perfect seriousness, "I do not believe
that one of us can live or die without the other.  But, hark! there's
an outcry at the castle!  They have found out that they are locked
in!  Ha! ho! hilloa, Hatto, how like you playing prisoner?"

Ebbo would have amused himself with the dismay of his garrison a
little longer, had not Friedel reminded him that their mother might
be suffering for their delay, and this suggestion made him march in
hastily.  He found her standing drooping under the pitiless storm
which Frau Kunigunde was pouring out at the highest pitch of her
cracked, trembling voice, one hand uplifted and clenched, the other
grasping the back of a chair, while her whole frame shook with rage
too mighty for her strength.

"Grandame," said Ebbo, striding up to the scene of action, "cease.
Remember my words yestereve."

"She has stolen the keys!  She has tampered with the servants!  She
has released the prisoner--thy prisoner, Ebbo!  She has cheated us as
she did with Wildschloss!  False burgherinn!  I trow she wanted
another suitor!  Bane--pest of Adlerstein!"

Friedmund threw a supporting arm round his mother, but Ebbo
confronted the old lady.  "Grandmother," he said, "I freed the
captive.  I stole the keys--I and Friedel!  No one else knew my
purpose.  He was my captive, and I released him because he was foully
taken.  I have chosen my lot in life," he added; and, standing in the
middle of the hall, he took off his cap, and spoke gravely:- "I will
not be a treacherous robber-outlaw, but, so help me God, a faithful,
loyal, godly nobleman."

His mother and Friedel breathed an "Amen" with all their hearts; and
he continued,

"And thou, grandame, peace!  Such reverence shalt thou have as befits
my father's mother; but henceforth mine own lady-mother is the
mistress of this castle, and whoever speaks a rude word to her
offends the Freiherr von Adlerstein."

That last day's work had made a great step in Ebbo's life, and there
he stood, grave and firm, ready for the assault; for, in effect, he
and all besides expected that the old lady would fly at him or at his
mother like a wild cat, as she would assuredly have done in a like
case a year earlier; but she took them all by surprise by collapsing
into her chair and sobbing piteously.  Ebbo, much distressed, tried
to make her understand that she was to have all care and honour; but
she muttered something about ingratitude, and continued to exhaust
herself with weeping, spurning away all who approached her; and
thenceforth she lived in a gloomy, sullen acquiescence in her
deposition.

Christina inclined to the opinion that she must have had some slight
stroke in the night, for she was never the same woman again; her
vigour had passed away, and she would sit spinning, or rocking
herself in her chair, scarcely alive to what passed, or scolding and
fretting like a shadow of her old violence.  Nothing pleased her but
the attentions of her grandsons, and happily she soon ceased to know
them apart, and gave Ebbo credit for all that was done for her by
Friedel, whose separate existence she seemed to have forgotten.

As long as her old spirit remained she would not suffer the approach
of her daughter-in-law, and Christina could only make suggestions for
her comfort to be acted on by Ursel; and though the reins of
government fast dropped from the aged hands, they were but gradually
and cautiously assumed by the younger Baroness.

Only Elsie remained of the rude, demoralized girls whom she had found
in the castle, and their successors, though dull and uncouth, were
meek and manageable; the men of the castle had all, except Matz, been
always devoted to the Frau Christina; and Matz, to her great relief,
ran away so soon as he found that decency and honesty were to be the
rule.  Old Hatto, humpbacked Hans, and Heinz the Schneiderlein, were
the whole male establishment, and had at least the merit of
attachment to herself and her sons; and in time there was a shade of
greater civilization about the castle, though impeded both by dire
poverty and the doggedness of the old retainers.  At least the court
was cleared of the swine, and, within doors, the table was spread
with dainty linen out of the parcels from Ulm, and the meals served
with orderliness that annoyed the boys at first, but soon became a
subject of pride and pleasure.

Frau Kunigunde lingered long, with increasing infirmities.  After the
winter day, when, running down at a sudden noise, Friedel picked her
up from the hearthstone, scorched, bruised, almost senseless, she
accepted Christina's care with nothing worse than a snarl, and
gradually seemed to forget the identity of her nurse with the
interloping burgher girl.  Thanks or courtesy had been no part of her
nature, least of all towards her own sex, and she did little but
grumble, fret, and revile her attendant; but she soon depended so
much on Christina's care, that it was hardly possible to leave her.
At her best and strongest, her talk was maundering abuse of her son's
low-born wife; but at times her wanderings showed black gulfs of
iniquity and coarseness of soul that would make the gentle listener
tremble, and be thankful that her sons were out of hearing.  And thus
did Christina von Adlerstein requite fifteen years of persecution.

The old lady's first failure had been in the summer of 1488; it was
the Advent season of 1489, when the snow was at the deepest, and the
frost at the hardest, that the two hardy mountaineer grandsons
fetched over the pass Father Norbert, and a still sturdier, stronger
monk, to the dying woman.

"Are we in time, mother?" asked Ebbo, from the door of the upper
chamber, where the Adlersteins began and ended life, shaking the snow
from his mufflings.  Ruddy with exertion in the sharp wind, what a
contrast he was to all within the room!

"Who is that?" said a thin, feeble voice.

"It is Ebbo.  It is the Baron," said Christina.  "Come in, Ebbo.  She
is somewhat revived."

"Will she be able to speak to the priest?" asked Ebbo.

"Priest!" feebly screamed the old woman.  "No priest for me!  My lord
died unshriven, unassoilzied.  Where he is, there will I be.  Let a
priest approach me at his peril!"

Stony insensibility ensued; nor did she speak again, though life
lasted many hours longer.  The priests did their office; for,
impenitent as the life and frantic as the words had been, the
opinions of the time deemed that their rites might yet give the
departing soul a chance, though the body was unconscious.

When all was over, snow was again falling, shifting and drifting, so
that it was impossible to leave the castle, and the two monks were
kept there for a full fortnight, during which Christmas solemnities
were observed in the chapel, for the first time since the days of
Friedmund the Good.  The corpse of Kunigunde, preserved--we must say
the word--salted, was placed in a coffin, and laid in that chapel to
await the melting of the snows, when the vault at the Hermitage could
be opened.  And this could not be effected till Easter had nearly
come round again, and it was within a week of their sixteenth
birthday that the two young Barons stood together at the coffin's
head, serious indeed, but more with the thought of life than of
death.



CHAPTER XII:  BACK TO THE DOVECOTE



For the first time in her residence at Adlerstein, now full half her
life, the Freiherrinn Christina ventured to send a messenger to Ulm,
namely, a lay brother of the convent of St. Ruprecht, who undertook
to convey to Master Gottfried Sorel her letter, informing him of the
death of her mother-in-law, and requesting him to send the same
tidings to the Freiherr von Adlerstein Wildschloss, the kinsman and
godfather of her sons.

She was used to wait fifty-two weeks for answers to her letters, and
was amazed when, at the end of three, two stout serving-men were
guided by Jobst up the pass; but her heart warmed to their flat caps
and round jerkins, they looked so like home.  They bore a letter of
invitation to her and her sons to come at once to her uncle's house.
The King of the Romans, and perhaps the Emperor, were to come to the
city early in the summer, and there could be no better opportunity of
presenting the young Barons to their sovereign.  Sir Kasimir of
Adlerstein Wildschloss would meet them there for the purpose, and
would obtain their admission to the League, in which all Swabian
nobles had bound themselves to put down robbery and oppression, and
outside which there was nothing but outlawry and danger.

"So must it be?" said Ebbo, between his teeth, as he leant moodily
against the wall, while his mother was gone to attend to the fare to
be set before the messengers.

"What! art not glad to take wing at last?" exclaimed Friedel, cut
short in an exclamation of delight.

"Take wing, forsooth!  To be guest of a greasy burgher, and call
cousin with him!  Fear not, Friedel; I'll not vex the motherling.
Heaven knows she has had pain, grief, and subjection enough in her
lifetime, and I would not hinder her visit to her home; but I would
she could go alone, nor make us show our poverty to the swollen city
folk, and listen to their endearments.  I charge thee, Friedel, do as
I do; be not too familiar with them.  Could we but sprain an ankle
over the crag--"

"Nay, she would stay to nurse us," said Friedel, laughing; "besides,
thou art needed for the matter of homage."

"Look, Friedel," said Ebbo, sinking his voice, "I shall not lightly
yield my freedom to king or Kaiser.  Maybe, there is no help for it;
but it irks me to think that I should be the last Lord of Adlerstein
to whom the title of Freiherr is not a mockery.  Why dost bend thy
brow, brother?  What art thinking of?"

"Only a saying in my mother's book, that well-ordered service is true
freedom," said Friedel.  "And methinks there will be freedom in
rushing at last into the great far-off!"--the boy's eye expanded and
glistened with eagerness.  "Here are we prisoners--to ourselves, if
you like--but prisoners still, pent up in the rocks, seeing no one,
hearing scarce an echo from the knightly or the poet world, nor from
all the wonders that pass.  And the world has a history going on
still, like the Chronicle.  Oh, Ebbo, think of being in the midst of
life, with lance and sword, and seeing the Kaiser--the Kaiser of the
holy Roman Empire!"

"With lance and sword, well and good; but would it were not at the
cost of liberty!"

However Ebbo forbore to damp his mother's joy, save by the one
warning--"Understand, mother, that I will not be pledged to anything.
I will not bend to the yoke ere I have seen and judged for myself."

The manly sound of the words gave a sweet sense of exultation to the
mother, even while she dreaded the proud spirit, and whispered, "God
direct thee, my son."

Certainly Ebbo, hitherto the most impetuous and least thoughtful of
the two lads, had a gravity and seriousness about him, that, but for
his naturally sweet temper, would have seemed sullen.  His
aspirations for adventure had hitherto been more vehement than
Friedel's; but, when the time seemed at hand, his regrets at what he
might have to yield overpowered his hopes of the future.  The fierce
haughtiness of the old Adlersteins could not brook the descent from
the crag, even while the keen, clear burgher wit that Ebbo inherited
from the other side of the house taught him that the position was
untenable, and that his isolated glory was but a poor mean thing
after all.  And the struggle made him sad and moody.

Friedel, less proud, and with nothing to yield, was open to blithe
anticipations of what his fancy pictured as the home of all the
beauty, sacred or romantic, that he had glimpsed at through his
mother.  Religion, poetry, learning, art, refinement, had all come to
him through her; and though he had a soul that dreamt and soared in
the lonely grandeur of the mountain heights, it craved further
aliment for its yearnings for completeness and perfection.  Long ago
had Friedel come to the verge of such attainments as he could work
out of his present materials, and keen had been his ardour for the
means of progress, though only the mountain tarn had ever been
witness to the full outpouring of the longings with which he gazed
upon the dim, distant city like a land of enchantment.

The journey was to be at once, so as to profit by the escort of
Master Sorel's men.  Means of transport were scanty, but Ebbo did not
choose that the messengers should report the need, and bring back a
bevy of animals at the burgher's expense; so the mother was mounted
on the old white mare, and her sons and Heinz trusted to their feet.
By setting out early on a May morning, the journey could be performed
ere night, and the twilight would find them in the domains of the
free city, where their small numbers would be of no importance.  As
to their appearance, the mother wore a black woollen gown and mantle,
and a black silk hood tied under her chin, and sitting loosely round
the stiff frame of her white cap--a nun-like garb, save for the soft
brown hair, parted over her brow, and more visible than she sometimes
thought correct, but her sons would not let her wear it out of sight.

The brothers had piece by piece surveyed the solitary suit of armour
remaining in the castle; but, though it might serve for defence, it
could not be made fit for display, and they must needs be contented
with blue cloth, spun, woven, dyed, fashioned, and sewn at home,
chiefly by their mother, and by her embroidered on the breast with
the white eagle of Adlerstein.  Short blue cloaks and caps of the
same, with an eagle plume in each, and leggings neatly fashioned of
deerskin, completed their equipments.  Ebbo wore his father's sword,
Friedel had merely a dagger and crossbow.  There was not a gold
chain, not a brooch, not an approach to an ornament among the three,
except the medal that had always distinguished Ebbo, and the coral
rosary at Christina's girdle.  Her own trinkets had gone in masses
for the souls of her father and husband; and though a few costly
jewels had been found in Frau Kunigunde's hoards, the mode of their
acquisition was so doubtful, that it had seemed fittest to bestow
them in alms and masses for the good of her soul.

"What ornament, what glory could any one desire better than two such
sons?" thought Christina, as for the first time for eighteen years
she crossed the wild ravine where her father had led her, a trembling
little captive, longing for wings like a dove's to flutter home
again.  Who would then have predicted that she should descend after
so long and weary a time, and with a gallant boy on either side of
her, eager to aid her every step, and reassure her at each giddy
pass, all joy and hope before her and them?  Yet she was not without
some dread and misgiving, as she watched her elder son, always
attentive to her, but unwontedly silent, with a stern gravity on his
young brow, a proud sadness on his lip.  And when he had come to the
Debateable Ford, and was about to pass the boundaries of his own
lands, he turned and gazed back on the castle and mountain with a
silent but passionate ardour, as though he felt himself doing them a
wrong by perilling their independence.

The sun had lately set, and the moon was silvering the Danube, when
the travellers came full in view of the imperial free city, girt in
with mighty walls and towers--the vine-clad hill dominated by its
crowning church; the irregular outlines of the unfinished spire of
the cathedral traced in mysterious dark lacework against the pearly
sky; the lofty steeple-like gate-tower majestically guarding the
bridge.  Christina clasped her hands in thankfulness, as at the
familiar face of a friend; Friedel glowed like a minstrel introduced
to his fair dame, long wooed at a distance; Ebbo could not but
exclaim, "Yea, truly, a great city is a solemn and a glorious sight!"

The gates were closed, and the serving-men had to parley at the
barbican ere the heavy door was opened to admit the party to the
bridge, between deep battlemented stone walls, with here and there
loopholes, showing the shimmering of the river beneath.  The slow,
tired tread of the old mare sounded hollow; the river rushed below
with the full swell of evening loudness; a deep-toned convent-bell
tolled gravely through the stillness, while, between its
reverberations, clear, distinct notes of joyous music were borne on
the summer wind, and a nightingale sung in one of the gardens that
bordered the banks.

"Mother, it is all that I dreamt!" breathlessly murmured Friedel, as
they halted under the dark arch of the great gateway tower.

Not however in Friedel's dreams had been the hearty voice that
proceeded from the lighted guard-room in the thickness of the
gateway.  "Freiherrinn von Adlerstein!  Is it she?  Then must I greet
my old playmate!"  And the captain of the watch appeared among
upraised lanterns and torches that showed a broad, smooth, plump face
beneath a plain steel helmet.

"Welcome, gracious lady, welcome to your old city.  What! do you not
remember Lippus Grundt, your poor Valentine?"

"Master Philip Grundt!" exclaimed Christina, amazed at the breadth of
visage and person; "and how fares it with my good Regina?"

"Excellent well, good lady.  She manages her trade and house as well
as the good man Bartolaus Fleischer himself.  Blithe will she be to
show you her goodly ten, as I shall my eight," he continued, walking
by her side; "and Barbara--you remember Barbara Schmidt, lady--"

"My dear Barbara?--That do I indeed!  Is she your wife?"

"Ay, truly, lady," he answered, in an odd sort of apologetic tone;
"you see, you returned not, and the housefathers, they would have it
so--and Barbara is a good housewife."

"Truly do I rejoice!" said Christina, wishing she could convey to him
how welcome he had been to marry any one he liked, as far as she was
concerned--he, in whom her fears of mincing goldsmiths had always
taken form--then signing with her hand, "I have my sons likewise to
show her."

"Ah, on foot!" muttered Grundt, as a not well-conceived apology for
not having saluted the young gentlemen.  "I greet you well, sirs,"
with a bow, most haughtily returned by Ebbo, who was heartily wishing
himself on his mountain.  "Two lusty, well-grown Junkern indeed, to
whom my Martin will be proud to show the humours of Ulm.  A fair good
night, lady!  You will find the old folks right cheery."

Well did Christina know the turn down the street, darkened by the
overhanging brows of the tall houses, but each lower window laughing
with the glow of light within that threw out the heavy mullions and
the circles and diamonds of the latticework, and here and there the
brilliant tints of stained glass sparkled like jewels in the upper
panes, pictured with Scripture scene, patron saint, or trade emblem.
The familiar porch was reached, the familiar knock resounded on the
iron-studded door.  Friedel lifted his mother from her horse, and
felt that she was quivering from head to foot, and at the same moment
the light streamed from the open door on the white horse, and the two
young faces, one eager, the other with knit brows and uneasy eyes.  A
kind of echo pervaded the house, "She is come! she is come!" and as
one in a dream Christina entered, crossed the well-known hall, looked
up to her uncle and aunt on the stairs, perceived little change on
their countenances, and sank upon her knees, with bowed head and
clasped hands.

"My child! my dear child!" exclaimed her uncle, raising her with one
hand, and crossing her brow in benediction with the other.  "Art thou
indeed returned?" and he embraced her tenderly.

"Welcome, fair niece!" said Hausfrau Johanna, more formally.  "I am
right glad to greet you here."

"Dear, dear mother!" cried Christina, courting her fond embrace by
gestures of the most eager affection, "how have I longed for this
moment! and, above all, to show you my boys!  Herr Uncle, let me
present my sons--my Eberhard, my Friedmund.  O Housemother, are not
my twins well-grown lads?"  And she stood with a hand on each, proud
that their heads were so far above her own, and looking still so
slight and girlish in figure that she might better have been their
sister than their mother.  The cloud that the sudden light had
revealed on Ebbo's brow had cleared away, and he made an inclination
neither awkward nor ungracious in its free mountain dignity and
grace, but not devoid of mountain rusticity and shy pride, and far
less cordial than was Friedel's manner.  Both were infinitely
relieved to detect nothing of the greasy burgher, and were greatly
struck with the fine venerable head before them; indeed, Friedel
would, like his mother, have knelt to ask a blessing, had he not been
under command not to outrun his brother's advances towards her
kindred.

"Welcome, fair Junkern!" said Master Gottfried; "welcome both for
your mother's sake and your own!  These thy sons, my little one?" he
added, smiling.  "Art sure I neither dream nor see double!  Come to
the gallery, and let me see thee better."

And, ceremoniously giving his hand, he proceeded to lead his niece up
the stairs, while Ebbo, labouring under ignorance of city forms and
uncertainty of what befitted his dignity, presented his hand to his
aunt with an air that half-amused, half-offended the shrewd dame.

"All is as if I had left you but yesterday!" exclaimed Christina.
"Uncle, have you pardoned me?  You bade me return when my work was
done."

"I should have known better, child.  Such return is not to be sought
on this side the grave.  Thy work has been more than I then thought
of."

"Ah! and now will you deem it begun--not done!" softly said
Christina, though with too much heartfelt exultation greatly to doubt
that all the world must be satisfied with two such boys, if only Ebbo
would be his true self.

The luxury of the house, the wainscoted and tapestried walls, the
polished furniture, the lamps and candles, the damask linen, the rich
array of silver, pewter, and brightly-coloured glass, were a great
contrast to the bare walls and scant necessaries of Schloss
Adlerstein; but Ebbo was resolved not to expose himself by
admiration, and did his best to stifle Friedel's exclamations of
surprise and delight.  Were not these citizens to suppose that
everything was tenfold more costly at the baronial castle?  And truly
the boy deserved credit for the consideration for his mother, which
made him merely reserved, while he felt like a wild eagle in a
poultry-yard.  It was no small proof of his affection to forbear more
interference with his mother's happiness than was the inevitable
effect of that intuition which made her aware that he was chafing and
ill at ease.  For his sake, she allowed herself to be placed in the
seat of honour, though she longed, as of old, to nestle at her
uncle's feet, and be again his child; but, even while she felt each
acceptance of a token of respect as almost an injury to them, every
look and tone was showing how much the same Christina she had
returned.

In truth, though her life had been mournful and oppressed, it had not
been such as to age her early.  It had been all submission, without
wear and tear of mind, and too simple in its trials for care and
moiling; so the fresh, lily-like sweetness of her maiden bloom was
almost intact, and, much as she had undergone, her once frail health
had been so braced by the mountain breezes, that, though delicacy
remained, sickliness was gone from her appearance.  There was still
the exquisite purity and tender modesty of expression, but with
greater sweetness in the pensive brown eyes.

"Ah, little one!" said her uncle, after duly contemplating her; "the
change is all for the better!  Thou art grown a wondrously fair dame.
There will scarce be a lovelier in the Kaiserly train."

Ebbo almost pardoned his great-uncle for being his great-uncle.

"When she is arrayed as becomes the Frau Freiherrinn," said the
housewife aunt, looking with concern at the coarse texture of her
black sleeve.  "I long to see our own lady ruffle it in her new gear.
I am glad that the lofty pointed cap has passed out; the coif becomes
my child far better, and I see our tastes still accord as to
fashion."

"Fashion scarce came above the Debateable Ford," said Christina,
smiling.  "I fear my boys look as if they came out of the
Weltgeschichte, for I could only shape their garments after my
remembrance of the gallants of eighteen years ago."

"Their garments are your own shaping!" exclaimed the aunt, now in an
accent of real, not conventional respect.

"Spinning and weaving, shaping and sewing," said Friedel, coming near
to let the housewife examine the texture.

"Close woven, even threaded, smooth tinted!  Ah, Stina, thou didst
learn something!  Thou wert not quite spoilt by the housefather's
books and carvings."

"I cannot tell whose teachings have served me best, or been the most
precious to me," said Christina, with clasped hands, looking from one
to another with earnest love.

"Thou art a good child.  Ah! little one, forgive me; you look so like
our child that I cannot bear in mind that you are the Frau
Freiherrinn."

"Nay, I should deem myself in disgrace with you, did you keep me at a
distance, and not THOU me, as your little Stina," she fondly
answered, half regretting her fond eager movement, as Ebbo seemed to
shrink together with a gesture perceived by her uncle.

"It is my young lord there who would not forgive the freedom," he
said, good-humouredly, though gravely.

"Not so," Ebbo forced himself to say; "not so, if it makes my mother
happy."

He held up his head rather as if he thought it a fool's paradise, but
Master Gottfried answered:  "The noble Freiherr is, from all I have
heard, too good a son to grudge his mother's duteous love even to
burgher kindred."

There was something in the old man's frank, dignified tone of grave
reproof that at once impressed Ebbo with a sense of the true
superiority of that wise and venerable old age to his own petulant
baronial self-assertion.  He had both head and heart to feel the
burgher's victory, and with a deep blush, though not without dignity,
he answered, "Truly, sir, my mother has ever taught us to look up to
you as her kindest and best--"

He was going to say "friend," but a look into the grand benignity of
the countenance completed the conquest, and he turned it into
"father."  Friedel at the same instant bent his knee, exclaiming, "It
is true what Ebbo says!  We have both longed for this day.  Bless us,
honoured uncle, as you have blessed my mother."

For in truth there was in the soul of the boy, who had never had any
but women to look up to, a strange yearning towards reverence, which
was called into action with inexpressible force by the very aspect
and tone of such a sage elder and counsellor as Master Gottfried
Sorel, and he took advantage of the first opening permitted by his
brother.  And the sympathy always so strong between the two quickened
the like feeling in Ebbo, so that the same movement drew him on his
knee beside Friedel in oblivion or renunciation of all lordly pride
towards a kinsman such as he had here encountered.

"Truly and heartily, my fair youths," said Master Gottfried, with the
same kind dignity, "do I pray the good God to bless you, and render
you faithful and loving sons, not only to your mother, but to your
fatherland."

He was unable to distinguish between the two exactly similar forms
that knelt before him, yet there was something in the quivering of
Friedel's head, which made him press it with a shade more of
tenderness than the other.  And in truth tears were welling into the
eyes veiled by the fingers that Friedel clasped over his face, for
such a blessing was strange and sweet to him.

Their mother was ready to weep for joy.  There was now no drawback to
her bliss, since her son and her uncle had accepted one another; and
she repaired to her own beloved old chamber a happier being than she
had been since she had left its wainscoted walls.

Nay, as she gazed out at the familiar outlines of roof and tower, and
felt herself truly at home, then knelt by the little undisturbed
altar of her devotions, with the cross above and her own patron saint
below in carved wood, and the flowers which the good aunt had ever
kept as a freshly renewed offering, she felt that she was happier,
more fully thankful and blissful than even in the girlish calm of her
untroubled life.  Her prayer that she might come again in peace had
been more than fulfilled; nay, when she had seen her boys kneel
meekly to receive her uncle's blessing, it was in some sort to her as
if the work was done, as if the millstone had been borne up for her,
and had borne her and her dear ones with it.

But there was much to come.  She knew full well that, even though her
sons' first step had been in the right direction, it was in a path
beset with difficulties; and how would her proud Ebbo meet them?



CHAPTER XIII:  THE EAGLETS IN THE CITY



After having once accepted Master Gottfried, Ebbo froze towards him
and Dame Johanna no more, save that a naturally imperious temper now
and then led to fitful stiffnesses and momentary haughtiness, which
were easily excused in one so new to the world and afraid of
compromising his rank.  In general he could afford to enjoy himself
with a zest as hearty as that of the simpler-minded Friedel.

They were early afoot, but not before the heads of the household were
coming forth for the morning devotions at the cathedral; and the
streets were stirring into activity, and becoming so peopled that the
boys supposed that it was a great fair day.  They had never seen so
many people together even at the Friedmund Wake, and it was several
days before they ceased to exclaim at every passenger as a new
curiosity.

The Dome Kirk awed and hushed them.  They had looked to it so long
that perhaps no sublunary thing could have realized their
expectations, and Friedel avowed that he did not know what he thought
of it.  It was not such as he had dreamt, and, like a German as he
was, he added that he could not think, he could only feel, that there
was something ineffable in it; yet he was almost disappointed to find
his visions unfulfilled, and the hues of the painted glass less pure
and translucent than those of the ice crystals on the mountains.
However after his eye had become trained, the deep influence of its
dim solemn majesty, and of the echoes of its organ tones, and chants
of high praise or earnest prayer, began to enchain his spirit; and,
if ever he were missing, he was sure to be found among the mysteries
of the cathedral aisles, generally with Ebbo, who felt the spell of
the same grave fascination, since whatever was true of the one
brother was generally true of the other.  They were essentially
alike, though some phases of character and taste were more developed
in the one or the other.

Master Gottfried was much edified by their perfect knowledge of the
names and numbers of his books.  They instantly, almost resentfully,
missed the Cicero's Offices that he had parted with, and joyfully
hailed his new acquisitions, often sitting with heads together over
the same book, reading like active-minded youths who were used to
out-of-door life and exercise in superabundant measure, and to study
as a valued recreation, with only food enough for the intellect to
awaken instead of satisfying it.

They were delighted to obtain instruction from a travelling student,
then attending the schools of Ulm--a meek, timid lad who, for love of
learning and desire of the priesthood, had endured frightful tyranny
from the Bacchanten or elder scholars, and, having at length attained
that rank, had so little heart to retaliate on the juniors that his
contemporaries despised him, and led him a cruel life until he
obtained food and shelter from Master Gottfried at the pleasant cost
of lessons to the young Barons.  Poor Bastien! this land of quiet,
civility, and books was a foretaste of Paradise to him after the hard
living, barbarity, and coarse vices of his comrades, of whom he now
and then disclosed traits that made his present pupils long to give
battle to the big shaggy youths who used to send out the lesser lads
to beg and steal for them, and cruelly maltreated such as failed in
the quest.

Lessons in music and singing were gladly accepted by both lads, and
from their uncle's carving they could not keep their hands.  Ebbo had
begun by enjoining Friedel to remember that the work that had been
sport in the mountains would be basely mechanical in the city, and
Friedel as usual yielded his private tastes; but on the second day
Ebbo himself was discovered in the workshop, watching the magic touch
of the deft workman, and he was soon so enticed by the perfect
appliances as to take tool in hand and prove himself not unadroit in
the craft.  Friedel however excelled in delicacy of touch and grace
and originality of conception, and produced such workmanship that
Master Gottfried could not help stroking his hair and telling him it
was a pity he was not born to belong to the guild.

"I cannot spare him, sir," cried Ebbo; "priest, scholar, minstrel,
artist--all want him."

"What, Hans of all streets, Ebbo?" interrupted Friedel.

"And guildmaster of none," said Ebbo, "save as a warrior; the rest
only enough for a gentleman!  For what I am thou must be!"

But Ebbo did not find fault with the skill Friedel was bestowing on
his work--a carving in wood of a dove brooding over two young eagles-
-the device that both were resolved to assume.  When their mother
asked what their lady-loves would say to this, Ebbo looked up, and
with the fullest conviction in his lustrous eyes declared that no
love should ever rival his motherling in his heart.  For truly her
tender sweetness had given her sons' affection a touch of romance,
for which Master Gottfried liked them the better, though his wife
thought their familiarity with her hardly accordant with the
patriarchal discipline of the citizens.

The youths held aloof from these burghers, for Master Gottfried
wisely desired to give them time to be tamed before running risk of
offence, either to, or by, their wild shy pride; and their mother
contrived to time her meetings with her old companions when her sons
were otherwise occupied.  Master Gottfried made it known that the
marriage portion he had designed for his niece had been intrusted to
a merchant trading in peltry to Muscovy, and the sum thus realized
was larger than any bride had yet brought to Adlerstein.  Master
Gottfried would have liked to continue the same profitable
speculations with it; but this would have been beyond the young
Baron's endurance, and his eyes sparkled when his mother spoke of
repairing the castle, refitting the chapel, having a resident
chaplain, cultivating more land, increasing the scanty stock of
cattle, and attempting the improvements hitherto prevented by lack of
means.  He fervently declared that the motherling was more than equal
to the wise spinning Queen Bertha of legend and lay; and the first
pleasant sense of wealth came in the acquisition of horses, weapons,
and braveries.  In his original mood, Ebbo would rather have stood
before the Diet in his home-spun blue than have figured in cloth of
gold at a burgher's expense; but he had learned to love his uncle, he
regarded the marriage portion as family property, and moreover he
sorely longed to feel himself and his brother well mounted, and
scarcely less to see his mother in a velvet gown.

Here was his chief point of sympathy with the housemother, who,
herself precluded from wearing miniver, velvet, or pearls, longed to
deck her niece therewith, in time to receive Sir Kasimir of
Adlerstein Wildschloss, as he had promised to meet his godsons at
Ulm.  The knight's marriage had lasted only a few years, and had left
him no surviving children except one little daughter, whom he had
placed in a nunnery at Ulm, under the care of her mother's sister.
His lands lay higher up the Danube, and he was expected at Ulm
shortly before the Emperor's arrival.  He had been chiefly in
Flanders with the King of the Romans, and had only returned to
Germany when the Netherlanders had refused the regency of Maximilian,
and driven him out of their country, depriving him of the custody of
his children.

Pfingsttag, or Pentecost-day, was the occasion of Christina's first
full toilet, and never was bride more solicitously or exultingly
arrayed than she, while one boy held the mirror and the other
criticized and admired as the aunt adjusted the pearl-bordered coif,
and long white veil floating over the long-desired black velvet
dress.  How the two lads admired and gazed, caring far less for their
own new and noble attire!  Friedel was indeed somewhat concerned that
the sword by his side was so much handsomer than that which Ebbo
wore, and which, for all its dinted scabbard and battered hilt, he
was resolved never to discard.

It was a festival of brilliant joy.  Wreaths of flowers hung from the
windows; rich tapestries decked the Dome Kirk, and the relics were
displayed in shrines of wonderful costliness of material and beauty
of workmanship; little birds, with thin cakes fastened to their feet,
were let loose to fly about the church, in strange allusion to the
event of the day; the clergy wore their most gorgeous robes; and the
exulting music of the mass echoed from the vaults of the long-drawn
aisles, and brought a rapt look of deep calm ecstasy over Friedel's
sensitive features.  The beggars evidently considered a festival as a
harvest-day, and crowded round the doors of the cathedral.  As the
Lady of Adlerstein came out leaning on Ebbo's arm, with Friedel on
her other side, they evidently attracted the notice of a woman whose
thin brown face looked the darker for the striped red and yellow silk
kerchief that bound the dark locks round her brow, as, holding out a
beringed hand, she fastened her glittering jet black eyes on them,
and exclaimed, "Alms! if the fair dame and knightly Junkern would
hear what fate has in store for them."

"We meddle not with the future, I thank thee," said Christina, seeing
that her sons, to whom gipsies were an amazing novelty, were in
extreme surprise at the fortune-telling proposal.

"Yet could I tell much, lady," said the woman, still standing in the
way.  "What would some here present give to know that the locks that
were shrouded by the widow's veil ere ever they wore the matron's
coif shall yet return to the coif once more?"

Ebbo gave a sudden start of dismay and passion; his mother held him
fast.  "Push on, Ebbo, mine; heed her not; she is a mere Bohemian."

"But how knew she your history, mother?" asked Friedel, eagerly.

"That might be easily learnt at our Wake," began Christina; but her
steps were checked by a call from Master Gottfried just behind.
"Frau Freiherrinn, Junkern, not so fast.  Here is your noble
kinsman."

A tall, fine-looking person, in the long rich robe worn on peaceful
occasions, stood forth, doffing his eagle-plumed bonnet, and, as the
lady turned and curtsied low, he put his knee to the ground and
kissed her hand, saying, "Well met, noble dame; I felt certain that I
knew you when I beheld you in the Dome."

"He was gazing at her all the time," whispered Ebbo to his brother;
while their mother, blushing, replied, "You do me too much honour,
Herr Freiherr."

"Once seen, never to be forgotten," was the courteous answer:  "and
truly, but for the stately height of these my godsons I would not
believe how long since our meeting was."

Thereupon, in true German fashion, Sir Kasimir embraced each youth in
the open street, and then, removing his long, embroidered Spanish
glove, he offered his hand, or rather the tips of his fingers, to
lead the Frau Christina home.

Master Sorel had invited him to become his guest at a very elab