orate
ornamental festival meal in honour of the great holiday, at which
were to be present several wealthy citizens with their wives and
families, old connections of the Sorel family.  Ebbo had resolved
upon treating them with courteous reserve and distance; but he was
surprised to find his cousin of Wildschloss comporting himself among
the burgomasters and their dames as freely as though they had been
his equals, and to see that they took such demeanour as perfectly
natural.  Quick to perceive, the boy gathered that the gulf between
noble and burgher was so great that no intimacy could bridge it over,
no reserve widen it, and that his own bashful hauteur was almost a
sign that he knew that the gulf had been passed by his own parents;
but shame and consciousness did not enable him to alter his manner
but rather added to its stiffness.

"The Junker is like an Englishman," said Sir Kasimir, who had met
many of the exiles of the Roses at the court of Mary of Burgundy; and
then he turned to discuss with the guildmasters the interruption to
trade caused by Flemish jealousies.

After the lengthy meal, the tables were removed, the long gallery was
occupied by musicians, and Master Gottfried crossed the hall to tell
his eldest grandnephew that to him he should depute the opening of
the dance with the handsome bride of the Rathsherr, Ulrich Burger.
Ebbo blushed up to the eyes, and muttered that he prayed his uncle to
excuse him.

"So!" said the old citizen, really displeased; "thy kinsman might
have proved to thee that it is no derogation of thy lordly dignity.
I have been patient with thee, but thy pride passes--"

"Sir," interposed Friedel hastily, raising his sweet candid face with
a look between shame and merriment, "it is not that; but you forget
what poor mountaineers we are.  Never did we tread a measure save now
and then with our mother on a winter evening, and we know no more
than a chamois of your intricate measures."

Master Gottfried looked perplexed, for these dances were matters of
great punctilio.  It was but seven years since the Lord of Praunstein
had defied the whole city of Frankfort because a damsel of that place
had refused to dance with one of his Cousins; and, though "Fistright"
and letters of challenge had been made illegal, yet the whole city of
Ulm would have resented the affront put on it by the young lord of
Adlerstein.  Happily the Freiherr of Adlerstein Wildschloss was at
hand.  "Herr Burgomaster," he said, "let me commence the dance with
your fair lady niece.  By your testimony," he added, smiling to the
youths, "she can tread a measure.  And, after marking us, you may try
your success with the Rathsherrinn."

Christina would gladly have transferred her noble partner to the
Rathsherrinn, but she feared to mortify her good uncle and aunt
further, and consented to figure alone with Sir Kasimir in one of the
majestic, graceful dances performed by a single couple before a
gazing assembly.  So she let him lead her to her place, and they
bowed and bent, swept past one another, and moved in interlacing
lines and curves, with a grand slow movement that displayed her quiet
grace and his stately port and courtly air.

"Is it not beautiful to see the motherling?" said Friedel to his
brother; "she sails like a white cloud in a soft wind.  And he stands
grand as a stag at gaze."

"Like a malapert peacock, say I," returned Ebbo; "didst not see,
Friedel, how he kept his eyes on her in church?  My uncle says the
Bohemians are mere deceivers.  Depend on it the woman had spied his
insolent looks when she made her ribald prediction."

"See," said Friedel, who had been watching the steps rather than
attending, "it will be easy to dance it now.  It is a figure my
mother once tried to teach us.  I remember it now."

"Then go and do it, since better may not be."

"Nay, but it should be thou."

"Who will know which of us it is?  I hated his presumption too much
to mark his antics."

Friedel came forward, and the substitution was undetected by all save
their mother and uncle; by the latter only because, addressing Ebbo,
he received a reply in a tone such as Friedel never used.

Natural grace, quickness of ear and eye, and a skilful partner,
rendered Friedel's so fair a performance that he ventured on sending
his brother to attend the councilloress with wine and comfits; while
he in his own person performed another dance with the city dame next
in pretension, and their mother was amused by Sir Kasimir's remark,
that her second son danced better than the elder, but both must
learn.

The remark displeased Ebbo.  In his isolated castle he knew no
superior, and his nature might yield willingly, but rebelled at being
put down.  His brother was his perfect equal in all mental and bodily
attributes, but it was the absence of all self-assertion that made
Ebbo so often give him the preference; it was his mother's tender
meekness in which lay her power with him; and if he yielded to
Gottfried Sorel's wisdom and experience, it was with the inward
consciousness of voluntary deference to one of lower rank.  But here
was Wildschloss, of the same noble blood with himself, his elder, his
sponsor, his protector, with every right to direct him, so that there
was no choice between grateful docility and headstrong folly.  If the
fellow had been old, weak, or in any way inferior, it would have been
more bearable; but he was a tried warrior, a sage counsellor, in the
prime vigour of manhood, and with a kindly reasonable authority to
which only a fool could fail to attend, and which for that very
reason chafed Ebbo excessively.

Moreover there was the gipsy prophecy ever rankling in the lad's
heart, and embittering to him the sight of every civility from his
kinsman to his mother.  Sir Kasimir lodged at a neighbouring hostel;
but he spent much time with his cousins, and tried to make them
friends with his squire, Count Rudiger.  A great offence to Ebbo was
however the criticisms of both knight and squire on the bearing of
the young Barons in military exercises.  Truly, with no instructor
but the rough lanzknecht Heinz, they must, as Friedel said, have been
born paladins to have equalled youths whose life had been spent in
chivalrous training.

"See us in a downright fight," said Ebbo; "we could strike as hard as
any courtly minion."

"As hard, but scarce as dexterously," said Friedel, "and be called
for our pains the wild mountaineers.  I heard the men-at-arms saying
I sat my horse as though it were always going up or down a precipice;
and Master Schmidt went into his shop the other day shrugging his
shoulders, and saying we hailed one another across the market-place
as if we thought Ulm was a mountain full of gemsbocks."

"Thou heardst! and didst not cast his insolence in his teeth?" cried
Ebbo.

"How could I," laughed Friedel, "when the echo was casting back in my
teeth my own shout to thee?  I could only laugh with Rudiger."

"The chief delight I could have, next to getting home, would be to
lay that fellow Rudiger on his back in the tilt-yard," said Ebbo.

But, as Rudiger was by four years his senior, and very expert, the
upshot of these encounters was quite otherwise, and the young
gentlemen were disabused of the notion that fighting came by nature,
and found that, if they desired success in a serious conflict, they
must practise diligently in the city tilt-yard, where young men were
trained to arms.  The crossbow was the only weapon with which they
excelled; and, as shooting was a favourite exercise of the burghers,
their proficiency was not as exclusive as had seemed to Ebbo a
baronial privilege.  Harquebuses were novelties to them, and they
despised them as burgher weapons, in spite of Sir Kasimir's assurance
that firearms were a great subject of study and interest to the King
of the Romans.  The name of this personage was, it may be feared,
highly distasteful to the Freiherr von Adlerstein, both as
Wildschloss's model of knightly perfection, and as one who claimed
submission from his haughty spirit.  When Sir Kasimir spoke to him on
the subject of giving his allegiance, he stiffly replied, "Sir, that
is a question for ripe consideration."

"It is the question," said Wildschloss, rather more lightly than
agreed with the Baron's dignity, "whether you like to have your
castle pulled down about your ears."

"That has never happened yet to Adlerstein!" said Ebbo, proudly.

"No, because since the days of the Hohenstaufen there has been
neither rule nor union in the empire.  But times are changing fast,
my Junker, and within the last ten years forty castles such as yours
have been consumed by the Swabian League, as though they were so many
walnuts."

"The shell of Adlerstein was too hard for them, though.  They never
tried."

"And wherefore, friend Eberhard?  It was because I represented to the
Kaiser and the Graf von Wurtemberg that little profit and no glory
would accrue from attacking a crag full of women and babes, and that
I, having the honour to be your next heir, should prefer having the
castle untouched, and under the peace of the empire, so long as that
peace was kept.  When you should come to years of discretion, then it
would be for you to carry out the intention wherewith your father and
grandfather left home."

"Then we have been protected by the peace of the empire all this
time?" said Friedel, while Ebbo looked as if the notion were hard of
digestion.

"Even so; and, had you not freely and nobly released your Genoese
merchant, it had gone hard with Adlerstein."

"Could Adlerstein be taken?" demanded Ebbo triumphantly.

"Your grandmother thought not," said Sir Kasimir, with a shade of
irony in his tone.  "It would be a troublesome siege; but the League
numbers 1,500 horse, and 9,000 foot, and, with Schlangenwald's
concurrence, you would be assuredly starved out."

Ebbo was so much the more stimulated to take his chance, and do
nothing on compulsion; but Friedel put in the question to what the
oaths would bind them.

"Only to aid the Emperor with sword and counsel in field or Diet, and
thereby win fame and honour such as can scarce be gained by carrying
prey to yon eagle roost."

"One may preserve one's independence without robbery," said Ebbo
coldly.

"Nay, lad:  did you ever hear of a wolf that could live without
marauding?  Or if he tried, would he get credit for so doing?"

"After all," said Friedel, "does not the present agreement hold till
we are of age?  I suppose the Swabian League would attempt nothing
against minors, unless we break the peace?"

"Probably not; I will do my utmost to give the Freiherr there time to
grow beyond his grandmother's maxims," said Wildschloss.  "If
Schlangenwald do not meddle in the matter, he may have the next five
years to decide whether Adlerstein can hold out against all Germany."

"Freiherr Kasimir von Adlerstein Wildschloss," said Eberhard, turning
solemnly on him, "I do you to wit once for all that threats will not
serve with me.  If I submit, it will be because I am convinced it is
right.  Otherwise we had rather both be buried in the ruins of our
castle, as its last free lords."

"So!" said the provoking kinsman; "such burials look grim when the
time comes, but happily it is not coming yet!"

Meantime, as Ebbo said to Friedel, how much might happen--a
disruption of the empire, a crusade against the Turks, a war in
Italy, some grand means of making the Diet value the sword of a free
baron, without chaining him down to gratify the greed of hungry
Austria.  If only Wildschloss could be shaken off!  But he only
became constantly more friendly and intrusive, almost paternal.  No
wonder, when the mother and her uncle made him so welcome, and were
so intolerably grateful for his impertinent interference, while even
Friedel confessed the reasonableness of his counsels, as if that were
not the very sting of them.

He even asked leave to bring his little daughter Thekla from her
convent to see the Lady of Adlerstein.  She was a pretty, flaxen-
haired maiden of five years old, in a round cap, and long narrow
frock, with a little cross at the neck.  She had never seen any one
beyond the walls of the nunnery; and, when her father took her from
the lay sister's arms, and carried her to the gallery, where sat
Hausfrau Johanna, in dark green, slashed with cherry colour, Master
Gottfried, in sober crimson, with gold medal and chain, Freiherrinn
Christina, in silver-broidered black, and the two Junkern stood near
in the shining mail in which they were going to the tilt yard, she
turned her head in terror, struggled with her scarce known father,
and shrieked for Sister Grethel.

"It was all too sheen," she sobbed, in the lay sister's arms; "she
did not want to be in Paradise yet, among the saints!  O! take her
back!  The two bright, holy Michaels would let her go, for indeed she
had made but one mistake in her Ave."

Vain was the attempt to make her lift her face from the black serge
shoulder where she had hidden it.  Sister Grethel coaxed and scolded,
Sir Kasimir reproved, the housemother offered comfits, and
Christina's soft voice was worst of all, for the child, probably
taking her for Our Lady herself, began to gasp forth a general
confession.  "I will never do so again!  Yes, it was a fib, but
Mother Hildegard gave me a bit of marchpane not to tell--"  Here the
lay sister took strong measures for closing the little mouth, and
Christina drew back, recommending that the child should be left
gradually to discover their terrestrial nature.  Ebbo had looked on
with extreme disgust, trying to hurry Friedel, who had delayed to
trace some lines for his mother on her broidery pattern.  In passing
the step where Grethel sat with Thekla on her lap, the clank of their
armour caused the uplifting of the little flaxen head, and two wide
blue eyes looked over Grethel's shoulder, and met Friedel's sunny
glance.  He smiled; she laughed back again.  He held out his arms,
and, though his hands were gauntleted, she let him lift her up, and
curiously smoothed and patted his cheek, as if he had been a strange
animal.

"You have no wings," she said.  "Are you St. George, or St. Michael?"

"Neither the one nor the other, pretty one.  Only your poor cousin
Friedel von Adlerstein, and here is Ebbo, my brother."

It was not in Ebbo's nature not to smile encouragement at the fair
little face, with its wistful look.  He drew off his glove to caress
her silken hair, and for a few minutes she was played with by the two
brothers like a newly-invented toy, receiving their attentions with
pretty half-frightened graciousness, until Count Rudiger hastened in
to summon them, and Friedel placed her on his mother's knee, where
she speedily became perfectly happy, and at ease.

Her extreme delight, when towards evening the Junkern returned, was
flattering even to Ebbo; and, when it was time for her to be taken
home, she made strong resistance, clinging fast to Christina, with
screams and struggles.  To the lady's promise of coming to see her
she replied, "Friedel and Ebbo, too," and, receiving no response to
this request, she burst out, "Then I won't come!  I am the
Freiherrinn Thekla, the heiress of Adlerstein Wildschloss and
Felsenbach.  I won't be a nun.  I'll be married!  You shall be my
husband," and she made a dart at the nearest youth, who happened to
be Ebbo.

"Ay, ay, you shall have him.  He will come for you, sweetest
Fraulein," said the perplexed Grethel, "so only you will come home!
Nobody will come for you if you are naughty."

"Will you come if I am good?" said the spoilt cloister pet, clinging
tight to Ebbo.

"Yes," said her father, as she still resisted, "come back, my child,
and one day shall you see Ebbo, and have him for a brother."

Thereat Ebbo shook off the little grasping fingers, almost as if they
had belonged to a noxious insect.

"The matron's coif should succeed the widow's veil."  He might talk
with scholarly contempt of the new race of Bohemian impostors; but
there was no forgetting that sentence.  And in like manner, though
his grandmother's allegation that his mother had been bent on
captivating Sir Kasimir in that single interview at Adlerstein, had
always seemed to him the most preposterous of all Kunigunde's forms
of outrage, the recollection would recur to him; and he could have
found it in his heart to wish that his mother had never heard of the
old lady's designs as to the oubliette.  He did most sincerely wish
Master Gottfried had never let Wildschloss know of the mode in which
his life had been saved.  Yet, while it would have seemed to him
profane to breathe even to Friedel the true secret of his repugnance
to this meddlesome kinsman, it was absolutely impossible to avoid his
most distasteful authority and patronage.

And the mother herself was gently, thankfully happy and unsuspicious,
basking in the tender home affection of which she had so long been
deprived, proud of her sons, and, though anxious as to Ebbo's
decision, with a quiet trust in his foundation of principle, and
above all trusting to prayer.



CHAPTER XIV:  THE DOUBLE-HEADED EAGLE



One summer evening, when shooting at a bird on a pole was in full
exercise in the tilt-yard, the sports were interrupted by a message
from the Provost that a harbinger had brought tidings that the
Imperial court was within a day's journey.

All was preparation.  Fresh sand had to be strewn on the arena.  New
tapestry hangings were to deck the galleries, the houses and
balconies to be brave with drapery, the fountain in the market-place
was to play Rhine wine, all Ulm was astir to do honour to itself and
to the Kaisar, and Ebbo stood amid all the bustle, drawing lines in
the sand with the stock of his arblast, subject to all that
oppressive self-magnification so frequent in early youth, and which
made it seem to him as if the Kaisar and the King of the Romans were
coming to Ulm with the mere purpose of destroying his independence,
and as if the eyes of all Germany were watching for his humiliation.

"See! see!" suddenly exclaimed Friedel; "look! there is something
among the tracery of the Dome Kirk Tower.  Is it man or bird?"

"Bird, folly!  Thou couldst see no bird less than an eagle from
hence," said Ebbo.  "No doubt they are about to hoist a banner."

"That is not their wont," returned Sir Kasimir.

"I see him," interrupted Ebbo.  "Nay, but he is a bold climber!  We
went up to that stage, close to the balcony, but there's no footing
beyond but crockets and canopies."

"And a bit of rotten scaffold," added Friedel.  "Perhaps he is a
builder going to examine it!  Up higher, higher!"

"A builder!" said Ebbo; "a man with a head and foot like that should
be a chamois hunter!  Shouldst thou deem it worse than the Red Eyrie,
Friedel?"

"Yea, truly!  The depth beneath is plainer!  There would be no
climbing there without--"

"Without what, cousin?" asked Wildschloss.

"Without great cause," said Friedel.  "It is fearful!  He is like a
fly against the sky."

"Beaten again!" muttered Ebbo; "I did think that none of these town-
bred fellows could surpass us when it came to a giddy height!  Who
can he be?"

"Look! look!" burst out Friedel.  "The saints protect him!  He is on
that narrowest topmost ledge--measuring; his heel is over the
parapet--half his foot!"

"Holding on by the rotten scaffold pole!  St. Barbara be his speed;
but he is a brave man!" shouted Ebbo.  "Oh! the pole has broken."

"Heaven forefend!" cried Wildschloss, with despair on his face unseen
by the boys, for Friedel had hidden his eyes, and Ebbo was straining
his with the intense gaze of horror.  He had carried his glance
downwards, following the 380 feet fall that must be the lot of the
adventurer.  Then looking up again he shouted, "I see him!  I see
him!  Praise to St. Barbara!  He is safe!  He has caught by the
upright stone work."

"Where? where?  Show me!" cried Wildschloss, grasping Ebbo's arm.

"There! clinging to that upright bit of tracery, stretching his foot
out to yonder crocket."

"I cannot see.  Mine eyes swim and dazzle," said Wildschloss.
"Merciful heavens! is this another tempting of Providence?  How is it
with him now, Ebbo?"

"Swarming down another slender bit of the stone network.  It must be
easy now to one who could keep head and hand steady in such a shock."

"There!" added Friedel, after a breathless space, "he is on the lower
parapet, whence begins the stair.  Do you know him, sir?  Who is he?"

"Either a Venetian mountebank," said Wildschloss, "or else there is
only one man I know of either so foolhardy or so steady of head."

"Be he who he may," said Ebbo, "he is the bravest man that ever I
beheld.  Who is he, Sir Kasimir?"

"An eagle of higher flight than ours, no doubt," said Wildschloss.
"But come; we shall reach the Dome Kirk by the time the climber has
wound his way down the turret stairs, and we shall see what like he
is."

Their coming was well timed, for a small door at the foot of the
tower was just opening to give exit to a very tall knight, in one of
those short Spanish cloaks the collar of which could be raised so as
to conceal the face.  He looked to the right and left, and had one
hand raised to put up the collar when he recognized Sir Kasimir, and,
holding out both hands, exclaimed, "Ha, Adlerstein! well met!  I
looked to see thee here.  No unbonneting; I am not come yet.  I am at
Strasburg, with the Kaisar and the Archduke, and am not here till we
ride in, in purple and in pall by the time the good folk have hung
out their arras, and donned their gold chains, and conned their
speeches, and mounted their mules."

"Well that their speeches are not over the lykewake of his kingly
kaisarly highness," gravely returned Sir Kasimir.

"Ha!  Thou sawest?  I came out here to avoid the gaping throng, who
don't know what a hunter can do.  I have been in worse case in the
Tyrol.  Snowdrifts are worse footing than stone vine leaves."

"Where abides your highness?" asked Wildschloss.

"I ride back again to the halting-place for the night, and meet my
father in time to do my part in the pageant.  I was sick of the
addresses, and, moreover, the purse-proud Flemings have made such a
stiff little fop of my poor boy that I am ashamed to look at him, or
hear his French accent.  So I rode off to get a view of this notable
Dom in peace, ere it be bedizened in holiday garb; and one can't stir
without all the Chapter waddling after one."

"Your highness has found means of distancing them."

"Why, truly, the Prior would scarce delight in the view from yonder
parapet," laughed his highness.  "Ha!  Adlerstein, where didst get
such a perfect pair of pages?  I would I could match my hounds as
well."

"They are no pages of mine, so please you," said the knight; "rather
this is the head of my name.  Let me present to your kingly highness
the Freiherr von Adlerstein."

"Thou dost not thyself distinguish between them!" said Maximilian, as
Friedmund stepped back, putting forward Eberhard, whose bright,
lively smile of interest and admiration had been the cause of his
cousin's mistake.  They would have doffed their caps and bent the
knee, but were hastily checked by Maximilian.  "No, no, Junkern, I
shall owe you no thanks for bringing all the street on me!--that's
enough.  Reserve the rest for Kaisar Fritz."  Then, familiarly taking
Sir Kasimir's arm, he walked on, saying, "I remember now.  Thou
wentest after an inheritance from the old Mouser of the Debateable
Ford, and wert ousted by a couple of lusty boys sprung of a peasant
wedlock."

"Nay, my lord, of a burgher lady, fair as she is wise and virtuous;
who, spite of all hindrances, has bred up these youths in all good
and noble nurture."

"Is this so?" said the king, turning sharp round on the twins.  "Are
ye minded to quit freebooting, and come a crusading against the Turks
with me?"

"Everywhere with such a leader!" enthusiastically exclaimed Ebbo.

"'What? up there?" said Maximilian, smiling.  "Thou hast the tread of
a chamois-hunter."

"Friedel has been on the Red Eyrie," exclaimed Ebbo; then, thinking
he had spoken foolishly, he coloured.

"Which is the Red Eyrie?" good-humouredly asked the king.

"It is the crag above our castle," said Friedel, modestly.

"None other has been there," added Ebbo, perceiving his auditor's
interest; "but he saw the eagle flying away with a poor widow's kid,
and the sight must have given him wings, for we never could find the
same path; but here is one of the feathers he brought down"--taking
off his cap so as to show a feather rather the worse for wear, and
sheltered behind a fresher one.

"Nay," said Friedel, "thou shouldst say that I came to a ledge where
I had like to have stayed all night, but that ye all came out with
men and ropes."

"We know what such a case is!" said the king.  "It has chanced to us
to hang between heaven and earth; I've even had the Holy Sacrament
held up for my last pious gaze by those who gave me up for lost on
the mountain-side.  Adlerstein?  The peak above the Braunwasser?
Some day shall ye show me this eyrie of yours, and we will see
whether we can amaze our cousins the eagles.  We see you at our
father's court to-morrow?" he graciously added, and Ebbo gave a ready
bow of acquiescence.

"There," said the king, as after their dismissal he walked on with
Sir Kasimir, "never blame me for rashness and imprudence.  Here has
this height of the steeple proved the height of policy.  It has made
a loyal subject of a Mouser on the spot."

"Pray Heaven it may have won a heart, true though proud!" said
Wildschloss; "but mousing was cured before by the wise training of
the mother.  Your highness will have taken out the sting of
submission, and you will scarce find more faithful subjects."

"How old are the Junkern?"

"Some sixteen years, your highness."

"That is what living among mountains does for a lad.  Why could not
those thrice-accursed Flemish towns let me breed up my boy to be good
for something in the mountains, instead of getting duck-footed and
muddy-witted in the fens?"

In the meantime Ebbo and Friedel were returning home in that sort of
passion of enthusiasm that ingenuous boyhood feels when first brought
into contact with greatness or brilliant qualities.

And brilliance was the striking point in Maximilian.  The Last of the
Knights, in spite of his many defects, was, by personal qualities,
and the hereditary influence of long-descended rank, verily a king of
men in aspect and demeanour, even when most careless and simple.  He
was at this time a year or two past thirty, unusually tall, and with
a form at once majestic and full of vigour and activity; a noble,
fair, though sunburnt countenance; eyes of dark gray, almost black;
long fair hair, a keen aquiline nose, a lip only beginning to
lengthen to the characteristic Austrian feature, an expression always
lofty, sometimes dreamy, and yet at the same time full of acuteness
and humour.  His abilities were of the highest order, his purposes,
especially at this period of his life, most noble and becoming in the
first prince of Christendom; and, if his life were a failure, and his
reputation unworthy of his endowments, the cause seems to have been
in great measure the bewilderment and confusion that unusual gifts
sometimes cause to their possessor, whose sight their conflicting
illumination dazzles so as to impair his steadiness of aim, while
their contending gleams light him into various directions, so that
one object is deserted for another ere its completion.  Thus
Maximilian cuts a figure in history far inferior to that made by his
grandson, Charles V., whom he nevertheless excelled in every personal
quality, except the most needful of all, force of character; and, in
like manner, his remote descendant, the narrow-minded Ferdinand of
Styria, gained his ends, though the able and brilliant Joseph II. was
to die broken-hearted, calling his reign a failure and mistake.
However, such terms as these could not be applied to Maximilian with
regard to home affairs.  He has had hard measure from those who have
only regarded his vacillating foreign policy, especially with respect
to Italy--ever the temptation and the bane of Austria; but even here
much of his uncertain conduct was owing to the unfulfilled promises
of what he himself called his "realm of kings," and a sovereign can
only justly be estimated by his domestic policy.  The contrast of the
empire before his time with the subsequent Germany is that of chaos
with order.  Since the death of Friedrich II. the Imperial title had
been a mockery, making the prince who chanced to bear it a mere mark
for the spite of his rivals; there was no centre of justice, no
appeal; everybody might make war on everybody, with the sole
preliminary of exchanging a challenge; "fist-right" was the
acknowledged law of the land; and, except in the free cities, and
under such a happy accident as a right-minded prince here and there,
the state of Germany seems to have been rather worse than that of
Scotland from Bruce to the union of the Crowns.  Under Maximilian,
the Diet became an effective council, fist-right was abolished,
independent robber-lords put down, civilization began to effect an
entrance, the system of circles was arranged, and the empire again
became a leading power in Europe, instead of a mere vortex of
disorder and misrule.  Never would Charles V. have held the position
he occupied had he come after an ordinary man, instead of after an
able and sagacious reformer like that Maximilian who is popularly
regarded as a fantastic caricature of a knight-errant, marred by
avarice and weakness of purpose.

At the juncture of which we are writing, none of Maximilian's less
worthy qualities had appeared; he had not been rendered shifty and
unscrupulous by difficulties and disappointments in money matters,
and had not found it impossible to keep many of the promises he had
given in all good faith.  He stood forth as the hope of Germany, in
salient contrast to the feeble and avaricious father, who was felt to
be the only obstacle in the way of his noble designs of establishing
peace and good discipline in the empire, and conducting a general
crusade against the Turks, whose progress was the most threatening
peril of Christendom.  His fame was, of course, frequently discussed
among the citizens, with whom he was very popular, not only from his
ease and freedom of manner, but because his graceful tastes, his love
of painting, sculpture, architecture, and the mechanical turn which
made him an improver of fire-arms and a patron of painting and
engraving, rendered their society more agreeable to him than that of
his dull, barbarous nobility.  Ebbo had heard so much of the
perfections of the King of the Romans as to be prepared to hate him;
but the boy, as we have seen, was of a generous, sensitive nature,
peculiarly prone to enthusiastic impressions of veneration; and
Maximilian's high-spirited manhood, personal fascination, and
individual kindness had so entirely taken him by surprise, that he
talked of him all the evening in a more fervid manner than did even
Friedel, though both could scarcely rest for their anticipations of
seeing him on the morrow in the full state of his entry.

Richly clad, and mounted on cream-coloured steeds, nearly as much
alike as themselves, the twins were a pleasant sight for a proud
mother's eyes, as they rode out to take their place in the procession
that was to welcome the royal guests.  Master Sorel, in ample gown,
richly furred, with medal and chain of office, likewise went forth as
Guildmaster; and Christina, with smiling lips and liquid eyes,
recollected the days when to see him in such array was her keenest
pleasure, and the utmost splendour her fancy could depict.

Arrayed, as her sons loved to see her, in black velvet, and with
pearl-bordered cap, Christina sat by her aunt in the tapestried
balcony, and between them stood or sat little Thekla von Adlerstein
Wildschloss, whose father had entrusted her to their care, to see the
procession pass by.  A rich Eastern carpet, of gorgeous colouring,
covered the upper balustrade, over which they leant, in somewhat
close quarters with the scarlet-bodiced dames of the opposite house,
but with ample space for sight up and down the rows of smiling
expectants at each balcony, or window, equally gay with hangings,
while the bells of all the churches clashed forth their gayest
chimes, and fitful bursts of music were borne upon the breeze.
Little Thekla danced in the narrow space for very glee, and wondered
why any one should live in a cloister when the world was so wide and
so fair.  And Dame Johanna tried to say something pious of worldly
temptations, and the cloister shelter; but Thekla interrupted her,
and, clinging to Christina, exclaimed, "Nay, but I am always naughty
with Mother Ludmilla in the convent, and I know I should never be
naughty out here with you and the barons; I should be so happy."

"Hush! hush! little one; here they come!"

On they came--stout lanzknechts first, the city guard with steel
helmets unadorned, buff suits, and bearing either harquebuses,
halberts, or those handsome but terrible weapons, morning stars.
Then followed guild after guild, each preceded by the banner bearing
its homely emblem--the cauldron of the smiths, the hose of the
clothiers, the helmet of the armourers, the bason of the barbers, the
boot of the sutors; even the sausage of the cooks, and the shoe of
the shoeblacks, were re-presented, as by men who gloried in the
calling in which they did life's duty and task.

First in each of these bands marched the prentices, stout, broad,
flat-faced lads, from twenty to fourteen years of age, with hair like
tow hanging from under their blue caps, staves in their hands, and
knives at their girdles.  Behind them came the journeymen, in
leathern jerkins and steel caps, and armed with halberts or cross-
bows; men of all ages, from sixty to one or two and twenty, and many
of the younger ones with foreign countenances and garb betokening
that they were strangers spending part of their wandering years in
studying the Ulm fashions of their craft.  Each trade showed a large
array of these juniors; but the masters who came behind were
comparatively few, mostly elderly, long-gowned, gold-chained
personages, with a weight of solid dignity on their wise brows--men
who respected themselves, made others respect them, and kept their
city a peaceful, well-ordered haven, while storms raged in the realm
beyond--men too who had raised to the glory of their God a temple,
not indeed fulfilling the original design, but a noble effort, and
grand monument of burgher devotion.

Then came the ragged regiment of scholars, wild lads from every part
of Germany and Switzerland, some wan and pinched with hardship and
privation, others sturdy, selfish rogues, evidently well able to take
care of themselves.  There were many rude, tyrannical-looking lads
among the older lads; and, though here and there a studious, earnest
face might be remarked, the prospect of Germany's future priests and
teachers was not encouraging.  And what a searching ordeal was
awaiting those careless lads when the voice of one, as yet still a
student, should ring through Germany!

Contrasting with these ill-kempt pupils marched the grave professors
and teachers, in square ecclesiastic caps and long gowns, whose
colours marked their degrees and the Universities that had conferred
them--some thin, some portly, some jocund, others dreamy; some
observing all the humours around, others still intent on Aristotelian
ethics; all men of high fame, with doctor at the beginning of their
names, and "or" or "us" at the close of them.  After them rode the
magistracy, a burgomaster from each guild, and the Herr Provost
himself--as great a potentate within his own walls as the Doge of
Venice or of Genoa, or perhaps greater, because less jealously
hampered.  In this dignified group was Uncle Gottfried, by complacent
nod and smile acknowledging his good wife and niece, who indeed had
received many a previous glance and bow from friends passing beneath.
But Master Sorel was no new spectacle in a civic procession, and the
sight of him was only a pleasant fillip to the excitement of his
ladies.

Here was jingling of spurs and trampling of horses; heraldic
achievements showed upon the banners, round which rode the mail-clad
retainers of country nobles who had mustered to meet their lords.
Then, with still more of clank and tramp, rode a bright-faced troop
of lads, with feathered caps and gay mantles.  Young Count Rudiger
looked up with courteous salutation; and just behind him, with
smiling lips and upraised faces, were the pair whose dark eyes, dark
hair, and slender forms rendered them conspicuous among the fair
Teutonic youth.  Each cap was taken off and waved, and each pair of
lustrous eyes glanced up pleasure and exultation at the sight of the
lovely "Mutterlein."  And she?  The pageant was well-nigh over to
her, save for heartily agreeing with Aunt Johanna that there was not
a young noble of them all to compare with the twin Barons of
Adlerstein!  However, she knew she should be called to account if she
did not look well at "the Romish King;" besides, Thekla was shrieking
with delight at the sight of her father, tall and splendid on his
mighty black charger, with a smile for his child, and for the lady a
bow so low and deferential that it was evidently remarked by those at
whose approach every lady in the balconies was rising, every head in
the street was bared.

A tall, thin, shrivelled, but exceedingly stately old man on a gray
horse was in the centre.  Clad in a purple velvet mantle, and bowing
as he went, he looked truly the Kaisar, to whom stately courtesy was
second nature.  On one side, in black and gold, with the jewel of the
Golden Fleece on his breast, rode Maximilian, responding gracefully
to the salutations of the people, but his keen gray eye roving in
search of the object of Sir Kasimir's salute, and lighting on
Christina with such a rapid, amused glance of discovery that, in her
confusion, she missed what excited Dame Johanna's rapturous
admiration--the handsome boy on the Emperor's other side, a fair,
plump lad, the young sovereign of the Low Countries, beautiful in
feature and complexion, but lacking the fire and the loftiness that
characterized his father's countenance.  The train was closed by the
Reitern of the Emperor's guard--steel-clad mercenaries who were
looked on with no friendly eyes by the few gazers in the street who
had been left behind in the general rush to keep up with the
attractive part of the show.

Pageants of elaborate mythological character impeded the imperial
progress at every stage, and it was full two hours ere the two youths
returned, heartily weary of the lengthened ceremonial, and laughing
at having actually seen the King of the Romans enduring to be
conducted from shrine to shrine in the cathedral by a large
proportion of its dignitaries.  Ebbo was sure he had caught an archly
disconsolate wink!

Ebbo had to dress for the banquet spread in the town-hall.  Space was
wanting for the concourse of guests, and Master Sorel had decided
that the younger Baron should not be included in the invitation.
Friedel pardoned him more easily than did Ebbo, who not only resented
any slight to his double, but in his fits of shy pride needed the aid
of his readier and brighter other self.  But it might not be, and Sir
Kasimir and Master Gottfried alone accompanied him, hoping that he
would not look as wild as a hawk, and would do nothing to diminish
the favourable impression he had made on the King of the Romans.

Late, according to mediaeval hours, was the return, and Ebbo spoke in
a tone of elation.  "The Kaisar was most gracious, and the king knew
me," he said, "and asked for thee, Friedel, saying one of us was
nought without the other.  But thou wilt go to-morrow, for we are to
receive knighthood."

"Already!" exclaimed Friedel, a bright glow rushing to his cheek.

"Yea," said Ebbo.  "The Romish king said somewhat about waiting to
win our spurs; but the Kaisar said I was in a position to take rank
as a knight, and I thanked him, so thou shouldst share the honour."

"The Kaisar," said Wildschloss, "is not the man to let a knight's fee
slip between his fingers.  The king would have kept off their grip,
and reserved you for knighthood from his own sword under the banner
of the empire; but there is no help for it now, and you must make
your vassals send in their dues."

"My vassals?" said Ebbo; "what could they send?"

"The aid customary on the knighthood of the heir."

"But there is--there is nothing!" said Friedel.  "They can scarce pay
meal and poultry enough for our daily fare; and if we were to flay
them alive, we should not get sixty groschen from the whole."

"True enough!  Knighthood must wait till we win it," said Ebbo,
gloomily.

"Nay, it is accepted," said Wildschloss.  "The Kaisar loves his iron
chest too well to let you go back.  You must be ready with your round
sum to the chancellor, and your spur-money and your fee to the
heralds, and largess to the crowd."

"Mother, the dowry," said Ebbo.

"At your service, my son," said Christina, anxious to chase the cloud
from his brow.

But it was a deep haul, for the avaricious Friedrich IV. made
exorbitant charges for the knighting his young nobles; and Ebbo soon
saw that the improvements at home must suffer for the honours that
would have been so much better won than bought.

"If your vassals cannot aid, yet may not your kinsman--?" began
Wildschloss.

"No!" interrupted Ebbo, lashed up to hot indignation.  "No, sir!
Rather will my mother, brother, and I ride back this very night to
unfettered liberty on our mountain, without obligation to any living
man."

"Less hotly, Sir Baron," said Master Gottfried, gravely.  "You broke
in on your noble godfather, and you had not heard me speak.  You and
your brother are the old man's only heirs, nor do ye incur any
obligation that need fret you by forestalling what would be your just
right.  I will see my nephews as well equipped as any young baron of
them."

The mother looked anxiously at Ebbo.  He bent his head with rising
colour, and said, "Thanks, kind uncle.  From YOU I have learnt to
look on goodness as fatherly."

"Only," added Friedel, "if the Baron's station renders knighthood
fitting for him, surely I might remain his esquire."

"Never, Friedel!" cried his brother.  "Without thee, nothing."

"Well said, Freiherr," said Master Sorel; "what becomes the one
becomes the other.  I would not have thee left out, my Friedel, since
I cannot leave thee the mysteries of my craft."

"To-morrow!" said Friedel, gravely.  "Then must the vigil be kept to-
night."

"The boy thinks these are the days of Roland and Karl the Great,"
said Wildschloss.  "He would fain watch his arms in the moonlight in
the Dome Kirk!  Alas! no, my Friedel!  Knighthood in these days
smacks more of bezants than of deeds of prowess."

"Unbearable fellow!" cried Ebbo, when he had latched the door of the
room he shared with his brother.  "First, holding up my inexperience
to scorn!  As though the Kaisar knew not better than he what befits
me!  Then trying to buy my silence and my mother's gratitude with his
hateful advance of gold.  As if I did not loathe him enough without!
If I pay my homage, and sign the League to-morrow, it will be purely
that he may not plume himself on our holding our own by sufferance,
in deference to him."

"You will sign it--you will do homage!" exclaimed Friedel.  "How
rejoiced the mother will be."

"I had rather depend at once--if depend I must--on yonder dignified
Kaisar and that noble king than on our meddling kinsman," said Ebbo.
"I shall be his equal now!  Ay, and no more classed with the court
Junkern I was with to-day.  The dullards!  No one reasonable thing
know they but the chase.  One had been at Florence; and when I asked
him of the Baptistery and rare Giotto of whom my uncle told us, he
asked if he were a knight of the Medici.  All he knew was that there
were ortolans at Ser Lorenzo's table; and he and the rest of them
talked over wines as many and as hard to call as the roll of AEneas's
comrades; and when each one must drink to her he loved best, and I
said I loved none like my sweet mother, they gibed me for a simple
dutiful mountaineer.  Yea, and when the servants brought a bowl, I
thought it was a wholesome draught of spring water after all their
hot wines and fripperies.  Pah!"

"The rose-water, Ebbo!  No wonder they laughed!  Why, the bowls for
our fingers came round at the banquet here."

"Ah! thou hast eyes for their finikin manners!  Yet what know they of
what we used to long for in polished life!  Not one but vowed he
abhorred books, and cursed Dr. Faustus for multiplying them.  I may
not know the taste of a stew, nor the fit of a glove, as they do, but
I trust I bear a less empty brain.  And the young Netherlanders that
came with the Archduke were worst of all.  They got together and
gabbled French, and treated the German Junkern with the very same
sauce with which they had served me.  The Archduke laughed with them,
and when the Provost addressed him, made as if he understood not,
till his father heard, and thundered out, 'How now, Philip!  Deaf on
thy German ear?  I tell thee, Herr Probst, he knows his own tongue as
well as thou or I, and thou shalt hear him speak as becomes the son
of an Austrian hunter.'  That Romish king is a knight of knights,
Friedel.  I could follow him to the world's end.  I wonder whether he
will ever come to climb the Red Eyrie."

"It does not seem the world's end when one is there," said Friedel,
with strange yearnings in his breast.

"Even the Dom steeple never rose to its full height," he added,
standing in the window, and gazing pensively into the summer sky.
"Oh, Ebbo! this knighthood has come very suddenly after our many
dreams; and, even though its outward tokens be lowered, it is still a
holy, awful thing."

Nurtured in mountain solitude, on romance transmitted through the
pure medium of his mother's mind, and his spirit untainted by contact
with the world, Friedmund von Adlerstein looked on chivalry with the
temper of a Percival or Galahad, and regarded it with a sacred awe.
Eberhard, though treating it more as a matter of business, was like
enough to his brother to enter into the force of the vows they were
about to make; and if the young Barons of Adlerstein did not perform
the night-watch over their armour, yet they kept a vigil that
impressed their own minds as deeply, and in early morn they went to
confession and mass ere the gay parts of the city were astir.

"Sweet niece," said Master Sorel, as he saw the brothers' grave,
earnest looks, "thou hast done well by these youths; yet I doubt me
at times whether they be not too much lifted out of this veritable
world of ours."

"Ah, fair uncle, were they not above it, how could they face its
temptations?"

"True, my child; but how will it be when they find how lightly others
treat what to them is so solemn?"

"There must be temptations for them, above all for Ebbo," said
Christina, "but still, when I remember how my heart sank when their
grandmother tried to bring them up to love crime as sport and glory,
I cannot but trust that the good work will be wrought out, and my
dream fulfilled, that they may be lights on earth and stars in
heaven.  Even this matter of homage, that seemed so hard to my Ebbo,
has now been made easy to him by his veneration for the Emperor."

It was even so.  If the sense that he was the last veritable FREE
lord of Adlerstein rushed over Ebbo, he was, on the other hand,
overmastered by the kingliness of Friedrich and Maximilian, and was
aware that this submission, while depriving him of little or no
actual power, brought him into relations with the civilized world,
and opened to him paths of true honour.  So the ceremonies were gone
through, his oath of allegiance was made, investiture was granted to
him by the delivery of a sword, and both he and Friedel were dubbed
knights.  Then they shared another banquet, where, as away from the
Junkern and among elder men, Ebbo was happier than the day before.
Some of the knights seemed to him as rude and ignorant as the
Schneiderlein, but no one talked to him nor observed his manners, and
he could listen to conversation on war and policy such as interested
him far more than the subjects affected by youths a little older than
himself.  Their lonely life and training had rendered the minds of
the brothers as much in advance of their fellows as they were behind
them in knowledge of the world.

The crass obtuseness of most of the nobility made it a relief to
return to the usual habits of the Sorel household when the court had
left Ulm.  Friedmund, anxious to prove that his new honours were not
to alter his home demeanour, was drawing on a block of wood from a
tinted pen-and-ink sketch; Ebbo was deeply engaged with a newly-
acquired copy of Virgil; and their mother was embroidering some
draperies for the long-neglected castle chapel,--all sitting, as
Master Gottfried loved to have them, in his studio, whence he had a
few moments before been called away, when, as the door slowly opened,
a voice was heard that made both lads start and rise.

"Yea, truly, Herr Guildmaster, I would see these masterpieces.  Ha!
What have you here for masterpieces?  Our two new double-ganger
knights?"  And Maximilian entered in a simple riding-dress, attended
by Master Gottfried, and by Sir Kasimir of Adlerstein Wildschloss.

Christina would fain have slipped out unperceived, but the king was
already removing his cap from his fair curling locks, and bending his
head as he said, "The Frau Freiherrinn von Adlerstein?  Fair lady, I
greet you well, and thank you in the Kaisar's name and mine for
having bred up for us two true and loyal subjects."

"May they so prove themselves, my liege!" said Christina, bending
low.

"And not only loyal-hearted," added Maximilian, smiling, "but ready-
brained, which is less frequent among our youth.  What is thy book,
young knight?  Virgilius Maro?  Dost thou read the Latin?" he added,
in that tongue.

"Not as well as we wish, your kingly highness," readily answered
Ebbo, in Latin, "having learnt solely of our mother till we came
hither."

"Never fear for that, my young blade," laughed the king.  "Knowst not
that the wiseacres thought me too dull for teaching till I was past
ten years?  And what is thy double about?  Drawing on wood?  How now!
An able draughtsman, my young knight?"

"My nephew Sir Friedmund is good to the old man," said Gottfried,
himself almost regretting the lad's avocation.  "My eyes are failing
me, and he is aiding me with the graving of this border.  He has the
knack that no teaching will impart to any of my present journeymen."

"Born, not made," quoth Maximilian.  "Nay," as Friedel coloured
deeper at the sense that Ebbo was ashamed of him, "no blushes, my
boy; it is a rare gift.  I can make a hundred knights any day, but
the Almighty alone can make a genius.  It was this very matter of
graving that led me hither."

For Maximilian had a passion for composition, and chiefly for
autobiography, and his head was full of that curious performance, Der
Weisse Konig, which occupied many of the leisure moments of his life,
being dictated to his former writing-master, Marcus Sauerwein.  He
had already designed the portrayal of his father as the old white
king, and himself as the young white king, in a series of woodcuts
illustrating the narrative which culminated in the one romance of his
life, his brief happy marriage with Mary of Burgundy; and he
continued eagerly to talk to Master Gottfried about the mystery of
graving, and the various scenes in which he wished to depict himself
learning languages from native speakers--Czech from a peasant with a
basket of eggs, English from the exiles at the Burgundian court, who
had also taught him the use of the longbow, building from architects
and masons, painting from artists, and, more imaginatively, astrology
from a wonderful flaming sphere in the sky, and the black art from a
witch inspired by a long-tailed demon perched on her shoulder.  No
doubt "the young white king" made an exceedingly prominent figure in
the discourse, but it was so quaint and so brilliant that it did not
need the charm of royal 