e the attempt.

"Now is our time," said Ebbo, who was standing on the narrow ledge
between the castle and the precipitous path leading to the meadow.
"One waggon may get over, but the second or third will stick in the
ruts that it leaves.  Now we will drop from our crag, and if the
Snake falls on them, why, then for a pounce of the Eagle."

The two young knights, so goodly in their bright steel, knelt for
their mother's blessing, and then sprang like chamois down the ivy-
twined steep, followed by their men, and were lost to sight among the
bushes and rocks.  Yet even while her frame quivered with fear, her
heart swelled at the thought what a gulf there was between these days
and those when she had hidden her face in despair, while Ermentrude
watched the Debateable Ford.

She watched now in suspense, indeed, but with exultation instead of
shame, as two waggons safely crossed; but the third stuck fast, and
presently turned over in the stream, impelled sideways by the efforts
of the struggling horses.  Then, amid endeavours to disentangle the
animals and succour the driver, the travellers were attacked by a
party of armed men, who dashed out of the beechwood, and fell on the
main body of the waggons, which were waiting on the bit of bare
shingly soil that lay between the new and old channels.  A wild melee
was all that Christina could see--weapons raised, horses starting,
men rushing from the river, while the clang and the shout rose even
to the castle.

Hark!  Out rings the clear call, "The Eagle to the rescue!"  There
they speed over the meadow, the two slender forms with glancing
helms!  O overrun not the followers, rush not into needless danger!
There is Koppel almost up with them with his big axe--Heinz's broad
shoulders near.  Heaven strike with them!  Visit not their
forefathers' sin on those pure spirits.  Some are flying.  Some one
has fallen!  O heavens! on which side?  Ah! it is into the
Schlangenwald woods that the fugitives direct their flight.  Three--
four--the whole troop pursued!  Go not too far!  Run not into
needless risk!  Your work is done, and gallantly.  Well done, young
knights of Adlerstein!  Which of you is it that stands pointing out
safe standing-ground for the men that are raising the waggon?  Which
of you is it who stands in converse with a burgher form?  Thanks and
blessings! the lads are safe, and full knightly hath been their first
emprise.

A quarter of an hour later, a gay step mounted the ascent, and
Friedel's bright face laughed from his helmet:  "There, mother, will
you crown your knights?  Could you see Ebbo bear down the chief
squire? for the old Snake was not there himself.  And whom do you
think we rescued, besides a whole band of Venetian traders to whom he
had joined himself?  Why, my uncle's friend, the architect, of whom
he used to speak--Master Moritz Schleiermacher."

"Moritz Schleiermacher!  I knew him as a boy."

"He had been laying out a Lustgarten for the Romish king at
Innspruck, and he is a stout man of his hands, and attempted defence;
but he had such a shrewd blow before we came up, that he lay like one
dead; and when he was lifted up, he gazed at us like one moon-struck,
and said, 'Are my eyes dazed, or are these the twins of Adlerstein,
that are as like as face to mirror?  Lads, lads, your uncle looked
not to hear of you acting in this sort.'  But soon we and his people
let him know how it was, and that eagles do not have the manner of
snakes."

"Poor Master Moritz!  Is he much hurt?  Is Ebbo bringing him up
hither?"

"No, mother, he is but giddied and stunned, and now must you send
down store of sausage, sourkraut, meat, wine, and beer; for the wains
cannot all cross till daylight, and we must keep ward all night lest
the Schlangenwalden should fall on them again.  Plenty of good cheer,
mother, to make a right merry watch."

"Take heed, Friedel mine; a merry watch is scarce a safe one."

"Even so, sweet motherling, and therefore must Ebbo and I share it.
You must mete out your liquor wisely, you see, enough for the credit
of Adlerstein, and enough to keep out the marsh fog, yet not enough
to make us snore too soundly.  I am going to take my lute; it would
be using it ill not to let it enjoy such a chance as a midnight
watch."

So away went the light-hearted boy, and by and by Christina saw the
red watch-fire as she gazed from her turret window.  She would have
been pleased to see how, marshalled by a merchant who had crossed the
desert from Egypt to Palestine, the waggons were ranged in a circle,
and the watches told off, while the food and drink were carefully
portioned out.

Freiherr Ebbo, on his own ground, as champion and host, was far more
at ease than in the city, and became very friendly with the merchants
and architect as they sat round the bright fire, conversing, or at
times challenging the mountain echoes by songs to the sound of
Friedel's lute.  When the stars grew bright, most lay down to sleep
in the waggons, while others watched, pacing up and down till Karl's
waggon should be over the mountain, and the vigil was relieved.

No disturbance took place, and at sunrise a hasty meal was partaken
of, and the work of crossing the river was set in hand.

"Pity," said Moritz, the architect, "that this ford were not spanned
by a bridge, to the avoiding of danger and spoil."

"Who could build such a bridge?" asked Ebbo.

"Yourself, Herr Freiherr, in union with us burghers of Ulm.  It were
well worth your while to give land and stone, and ours to give labour
and skill, provided we fixed a toll on the passage, which would be
willingly paid to save peril and delay."

The brothers caught at the idea, and the merchants agreed that such a
bridge would be an inestimable boon to all traffickers between
Constance, Ulm, and Augsburg, and would attract many travellers who
were scared away by the evil fame of the Debateable Ford.  Master
Moritz looked at the stone of the mountain, pronounced it excellent
material, and already sketched the span of the arches with a view to
winter torrents.  As to the site, the best was on the firm ground
above the ford; but here only one side was Adlerstein, while on the
other Ebbo claimed both banks, and it was probable that an equally
sound foundation could be obtained, only with more cost and delay.

After this survey, the travellers took leave of the barons, promising
to write when their fellow-citizens should have been sounded as to
the bridge; and Ebbo remained in high spirits, with such brilliant
purposes that he had quite forgotten his gloomy forebodings.  "Peace
instead of war at home," he said; "with the revenue it will bring, I
will build a mill, and set our lads to work, so that they may become
less dull and doltish than their parents.  Then will we follow the
Emperor with a train that none need despise!  No one will talk now of
Adlerstein not being able to take care of himself!"

Letters came from Ulm, saying that the guilds of mercers and wine
merchants were delighted with the project, and invited the Baron of
Adlerstein to a council at the Rathhaus.  Master Sorel begged the
mother to come with her sons to be his guest; but fearing the
neighbourhood of Sir Kasimir, she remained at home, with Heinz for
her seneschal while her sons rode to the city.  There Ebbo found that
his late exploit and his future plan had made him a person of much
greater consideration than on his last visit, and he demeaned himself
with far more ease and affability in consequence.  He had affairs on
his hands too, and felt more than one year older.

The two guilds agreed to build the bridge, and share the toll with
the Baron in return for the ground and materials; but they preferred
the plan that placed one pier on the Schlangenwald bank, and proposed
to write to the Count an offer to include him in the scheme, awarding
him a share of the profits in proportion to his contribution.
However vexed at the turn affairs had taken, Ebbo could offer no
valid objection, and was obliged to affix his signature to the letter
in company with the guildmasters.

It was despatched by the city pursuivants -


The only men who safe might ride;


Their errands on the border side and a meeting was appointed in the
Rathhaus for the day of their expected return.  The higher burghers
sat on their carved chairs in the grand old hall, the lesser magnates
on benches, and Ebbo, in an elbowed seat far too spacious for his
slender proportions, met a glance from Friedel that told him his
merry brother was thinking of the frog and the ox.  The pursuivants
entered--hardy, shrewd-looking men, with the city arms decking them
wherever there was room for them.

"Honour-worthy sirs," they said, "no letter did the Graf von
Schlangenwald return."

"Sent he no message?" demanded Moritz Schleiermacher.

"Yea, worthy sir, but scarce befitting this reverend assembly."  On
being pressed, however, it was repeated:  "The Lord Count was pleased
to swear at what he termed the insolence of the city in sending him
heralds, 'as if,' said he, 'the dogs,' your worships, 'were his
equals.'  Then having cursed your worships, he reviled the crooked
writing of Herr Clerk Diedrichson, and called his chaplain to read it
to him.  Herr Priest could scarce read three lines for his foul
language about the ford.  'Never,' said he, 'would he consent to
raising a bridge--a mean trick,' so said he, 'for defrauding him of
his rights to what the flood sent him.'"

"But," asked Ebbo, "took he no note of our explanation, that if he
give not the upper bank, we will build lower, where both sides are my
own?"

"He passed it not entirely over," replied the messenger.

"What said he--the very words?" demanded Ebbo, with the paling cheek
and low voice that made his passion often seem like patience.

"He said--(the Herr Freiherr will pardon me for repeating the words)-
-he said, 'Tell the misproud mongrel of Adlerstein that he had best
sit firm in his own saddle ere meddling with his betters, and if he
touch one pebble of the Braunwasser, he will rue it.  And before your
city-folk take up with him or his, they had best learn whether he
have any right at all in the case.'"

"His right is plain," said Master Gottfried; "full proofs were given
in, and his investiture by the Kaisar forms a title in itself.  It is
mere bravado, and an endeavour to make mischief between the Baron and
the city."

"Even so did I explain, Herr Guildmaster," said the pursuivant; "but,
pardon me, the Count laughed me to scorn, and quoth he, 'asked the
Kaisar for proof of his father's death!'"

"Mere mischief-making, as before," said Master Gottfried, while his
nephews started with amaze.  "His father's death was proved by an
eye-witness, whom you still have in your train, have you not, Herr
Freiherr?"

"Yea," replied Ebbo, "he is at Adlerstein now, Heinrich Bauermann,
called the Schneiderlein, a lanzknecht, who alone escaped the
slaughter, and from whom we have often heard how my father died,
choked in his own blood, from a deep breast-wound, immediately after
he had sent home his last greetings to my lady mother."

"Was the corpse restored?" asked the able Rathsherr Ulrich.

"No," said Ebbo.  "Almost all our retainers had perished, and when a
friar was sent to the hostel to bring home the remains, it appeared
that the treacherous foe had borne them off--nay, my grandfather's
head was sent to the Diet!"

The whole assembly agreed that the Count could only mean to make the
absence of direct evidence about a murder committed eighteen years
ago tell in sowing distrust between the allies.  The suggestion was
not worth a thought, and it was plain that no site would be available
except the Debateable Strand.  To this, however, Ebbo's title was
assailable, both on account of his minority, as well as his father's
unproved death, and of the disputed claim to the ground.  The
Rathsherr, Master Gottfried, and others, therefore recommended
deferring the work till the Baron should be of age, when, on again
tendering his allegiance, he might obtain a distinct recognition of
his marches.  But this policy did not consort with the quick spirit
of Moritz Schleiermacher, nor with the convenience of the mercers and
wine-merchants, who were constant sufferers by the want of a bridge,
and afraid of waiting four years, in which a lad like the Baron might
return to the nominal instincts of his class, or the Braunwasser
might take back the land it had given; whilst Ebbo himself was
urgent, with all the defiant fire of youth, to begin building at once
in spite of all gainsayers.

"Strife and blood will it cost," said Master Sorel, gravely.

"What can be had worth the having save at cost of strife and blood?"
said Ebbo, with a glance of fire.

"Youth speaks of counting the cost.  Little knows it what it saith,"
sighed Master Gottfried.

"Nay," returned the Rathsherr, "were it otherwise, who would have the
heart for enterprise?"

So the young knights mounted, and had ridden about half the way in
silence, when Ebbo exclaimed, "Friedel"--and as his brother started,
"What art musing on?"

"What thou art thinking of," said Friedel, turning on him an eye that
had not only something of the brightness but of the penetration of a
sunbeam.

"I do not think thereon at all," said Ebbo, gloomily.  "It is a
figment of the old serpent to hinder us from snatching his prey from
him."

"Nevertheless," said Friedel, "I cannot but remember that the Genoese
merchant of old told us of a German noble sold by his foes to the
Moors."

"Folly!  That tale was too recent to concern my father."

"I did not think it did," said Friedel; "but mayhap that noble's
family rest equally certain of his death."

"Pfui!" said Ebbo, hotly; "hast not heard fifty times how he died
even in speaking, and how Heinz crossed his hands on his breast?
What wouldst have more?"

"Hardly even that," said Friedel, slightly smiling.

"Tush!" hastily returned his brother, "I meant only by way of proof.
Would an honest old fellow like Heinz be a deceiver?"

"Not wittingly.  Yet I would fain ride to that hostel and make
inquiries!"

"The traitor host met his deserts, and was broken on the wheel for
murdering a pedlar a year ago," said Ebbo.  "I would I knew where my
father was buried, for then would I bring his corpse honourably back;
but as to his being a living man, I will not have it spoken of to
trouble my mother."

"To trouble her?" exclaimed Friedel.

"To trouble her," repeated Ebbo.  "Long since hath passed the pang of
his loss, and there is reason in what old Sorel says, that he must
have been a rugged, untaught savage, with little in common with the
gentle one, and that tender memory hath decked him out as he never
could have been.  Nay, Friedel, it is but sense.  What could a man
have been under the granddame's breeding?"

"It becomes not thee to say so!" returned Friedel.  "Nay, he could
learn to love our mother."

"One sign of grace, but doubtless she loved him the better for their
having been so little together.  Her heart is at peace, believing him
in his grave; but let her imagine him in Schlangenwald's dungeon, or
some Moorish galley, if thou likest it better, and how will her mild
spirit be rent!"

"It might be so," said Friedel, thoughtfully.  "It may be best to
keep this secret from her till we have fuller certainty."

"Agreed then," said Ebbo, "unless the Wildschloss fellow should again
molest us, when his answer is ready."

"Is this just towards my mother?" said Friedel.

"Just!  What mean'st thou?  Is it not our office and our dearest
right to shield our mother from care?  And is not her chief wish to
be rid of the Wildschloss suit?"

Nevertheless Ebbo was moody all the way home, but when there he
devoted himself in his most eager and winning way to his mother,
telling her of Master Gottfried's woodcuts, and Hausfrau Johanna's
rheumatism, and of all the news of the country, in especial that the
Kaisar was at Lintz, very ill with a gangrene in his leg, said to
have been caused by his habit of always kicking doors open, and that
his doctors thought of amputation, a horrible idea in the fifteenth
century.  The young baron was evidently bent on proving that no one
could make his mother so happy as he could; and he was not far wrong
there.

Friedel, however, could not rest till he had followed Heinz to the
stable, and speaking over the back of the old white mare, the only
other survivor of the massacre, had asked him once more for the
particulars, a tale he was never loth to tell; but when Friedel
further demanded whether he was certain of having seen the death of
his younger lord, he replied, as if hurt:  "What, think you I would
have quitted him while life was yet in him?"

"No, certainly, good Heinz; yet I would fain know by what tokens thou
knewest his death."

"Ah!  Sir Friedel; when you have seen a stricken field or two, you
will not ask how I know death from life."

"Is a swoon so utterly unlike death?"

"I say not but that an inexperienced youth might be mistaken," said
Heinz; "but for one who had learned the bloody trade, it were
impossible.  Why ask, sir?"

"Because," said Friedel, low and mysteriously--"my brother would not
have my mother know it, but--Count Schlangenwald demanded whether we
could prove my father's death."

"Prove!  He could not choose but die with three such wounds, as the
old ruffian knows.  I shall bless the day, Sir Friedmund, when I see
you or your brother give back those strokes!  A heavy reckoning be
his."

"We all deem that line only meant to cross our designs," said
Friedel.  "Yet, Heinz, I would I knew how to find out what passed
when thou wast gone.  Is there no servant at the inn--no retainer of
Schlangenwald that aught could be learnt from?"

"By St. Gertrude," roughly answered the Schneiderlein, "if you cannot
be satisfied with the oath of a man like me, who would have given his
life to save your father, I know not what will please you."

Friedel, with his wonted good-nature, set himself to pacify the
warrior with assurances of his trust; yet while Ebbo plunged more
eagerly into plans for the bridge-building, Friedel drew more and
more into his old world of musings; and many a summer afternoon was
spent by him at the Ptarmigan's Mere, in deep communings with
himself, as one revolving a purpose.

Christina could not but observe, with a strange sense of foreboding,
that, while one son was more than ever in the lonely mountain
heights, the other was far more at the base.  Master Moritz
Schleiermacher was a constant guest at the castle, and Ebbo was much
taken up with his companionship.  He was a strong, shrewd man, still
young, but with much experience, and he knew how to adapt himself to
intercourse with the proud nobility, preserving an independent
bearing, while avoiding all that haughtiness could take umbrage at;
and thus he was acquiring a greater influence over Ebbo than was
perceived by any save the watchful mother, who began to fear lest her
son was acquiring an infusion of worldly wisdom and eagerness for
gain that would indeed be a severance between him and his brother.

If she had known the real difference that unconsciously kept her sons
apart, her heart would have ached yet more.



CHAPTER XVIII:  FRIEDMUND IN THE CLOUDS



The stone was quarried high on the mountain, and a direct road was
made for bringing it down to the water-side.  The castle profited by
the road in accessibility, but its impregnability was so far
lessened.  However, as Ebbo said, it was to be a friendly harbour,
instead of a robber crag, and in case of need the communication could
easily be destroyed.  The blocks of stone were brought down, and
wooden sheds were erected for the workmen in the meadow.

In August, however, came tidings that, after two amputations of his
diseased limb, the Kaisar Friedrich III. had died--it was said from
over free use of melons in the fever consequent on the operation.
His death was not likely to make much change in the government, which
had of late been left to his son.  At this time the King of the
Romans (for the title of Kaisar was conferred only by coronation by
the Pope, and this Maximilian never received) was at Innspruck
collecting troops for the deliverance of Styria and Carinthia from a
horde of invading Turks.  The Markgraf of Wurtemburg sent an
intimation to all the Swabian League that the new sovereign would be
best pleased if their homage were paid to him in his camp at the head
of their armed retainers.

Here was the way of enterprise and honour open at last, and the young
barons of Adlerstein eagerly prepared for it, equipping their vassals
and sending to Ulm to take three or four men-at-arms into their pay,
so as to make up twenty lances as the contingent of Adlerstein.  It
was decided that Christina should spend the time of their absence at
Ulm, whither her sons would escort her on their way to the camp.  The
last busy day was over, and in the summer evening Christina was
sitting on the castle steps listening to Ebbo's eager talk of his
plans of interesting his hero, the King of the Romans, in his bridge,
and obtaining full recognition of his claim to the Debateable Strand,
where the busy workmen could be seen far below.

Presently Ebbo, as usual when left to himself, grew restless for want
of Friedel, and exclaiming, "The musing fit is on him!--he will stay
all night at the tarn if I fetch him not," he set off in quest of
him, passing through the hamlet to look for him in the chapel on his
way.

Not finding Friedel there, he was, however, some way up towards the
tarn, when he met his brother wearing the beamy yet awestruck look
that he often brought from the mountain height, yet with a steadfast
expression of resolute purpose on his face.

"Ah, dreamer!" said Ebbo, "I knew where to seek thee!  Ever in the
clouds!"

"Yes, I have been to the tarn," said Friedel, throwing his arm round
his brother's neck in their boyish fashion.  "It has been very dear
to me, and I longed to see its gray depths once more."

"Once!  Yea manifold times shalt thou see them," said Ebbo.
"Schleiermacher tells me that these are no Janissaries, but a mere
miscreant horde, even by whom glory can scarce be gained, and no
peril at all."

"I know not," said Friedel, "but it is to me as if I were taking my
leave of all these purple hollows and heaven-lighted peaks cleaving
the sky.  All the more, Ebbo, since I have made up my mind to a
resolution."

"Nay, none of the old monkish fancies," cried Ebbo, "against them
thou art sworn, so long as I am true knight."

"No, it is not the monkish fancy, but I am convinced that it is my
duty to strive to ascertain my father's fate.  Hold, I say not that
it is thine.  Thou hast thy charge here--"

"Looking for a dead man," growled Ebbo; "a proper quest!"

"Not so," returned Friedel.  "At the camp it will surely be possible
to learn, through either Schlangenwald or his men, how it went with
my father.  Men say that his surviving son, the Teutonic knight, is
of very different mould.  He might bring something to light.  Were it
proved to be as the Schneiderlein avers, then would our conscience be
at rest; but, if he were in Schlangenwald's dungeon--"

"Folly!  Impossible!"

"Yet men have pined eighteen years in dark vaults," said Friedel;
"and, when I think that so may he have wasted for the whole of our
lives that have been so free and joyous on his own mountain, it irks
me to bound on the heather or gaze at the stars."

"If the serpent hath dared," cried Ebbo, "though it is mere folly to
think of it, we would summon the League and have his castle about his
ears!  Not that I believe it."

"Scarce do I," said Friedel; "but there haunts me evermore the
description of the kindly German chained between the decks of the
Corsair's galley.  Once and again have I dreamt thereof.  And, Ebbo,
recollect the prediction that so fretted thee.  Might not yon dark-
cheeked woman have had some knowledge of the East and its captives?"

Ebbo started, but resumed his former tone.  "So thou wouldst begin
thine errantry like Sir Hildebert and Sir Hildebrand in the 'Rose
garden'?  Have a care.  Such quests end in mortal conflict between
the unknown father and son."

"I should know him," said Friedel, enthusiastically, "or, at least,
he would know my mother's son in me; and, could I no otherwise ransom
him, I would ply the oar in his stead."

"A fine exchange for my mother and me," gloomily laughed Ebbo, "to
lose thee, my sublimated self, for a rude, savage lord, who would
straightway undo all our work, and rate and misuse our sweet mother
for being more civilized than himself."

"Shame, Ebbo!" cried Friedel, "or art thou but in jest?"

"So far in jest that thou wilt never go, puissant Sir Hildebert,"
returned Ebbo, drawing him closer.  "Thou wilt learn--as I also trust
to do--in what nameless hole the serpent hid his remains.  Then shall
they be duly coffined and blazoned.  All the monks in the cloisters
for twenty miles round shall sing requiems, and thou and I will walk
bareheaded, with candles in our hands, by the bier, till we rest him
in the Blessed Friedmund's chapel; and there Lucas Handlein shall
carve his tomb, and thou shalt sit for the likeness."

"So may it end," said Friedel, "but either I will know him dead, or
endeavour somewhat in his behalf.  And that the need is real, as well
as the purpose blessed, I have become the more certain, for, Ebbo, as
I rose to descend the hill, I saw on the cloud our patron's very
form--I saw myself kneel before him and receive his blessing."

Ebbo burst out laughing.  "Now know I that it is indeed as saith
Schleiermacher," he said, "and that these phantoms of the Blessed
Friedmund are but shadows cast by the sun on the vapours of the
ravine.  See, Friedel, I had gone to seek thee at the chapel, and
meeting Father Norbert, I bent my knee, that I might take his
farewell blessing.  I had the substance, thou the shadow, thou
dreamer!"

Friedel was as much mortified for the moment as his gentle nature
could be.  Then he resumed his sweet smile, saying, "Be it so!  I
have oft read that men are too prone to take visions and special
providences to themselves, and now I have proved the truth of the
saying."

"And," said Ebbo, "thou seest thy purpose is as baseless as thy
vision?"

"No, Ebbo.  It grieves me to differ from thee, but my resolve is
older than the fancy, and may not be shaken because I was vain enough
to believe that the Blessed Friedmund could stoop to bless me."

"Ha!" shouted Ebbo, glad to see an object on which to vent his secret
annoyance.  "Who goes there, skulking round the rocks?  Here, rogue,
what art after here?"

"No harm," sullenly replied a half-clad boy.

"Whence art thou?  From Schlangenwald, to spy what more we can be
robbed of?  The lash--"

"Hold," interposed Friedel.  "Perchance the poor lad had no evil
purposes.  Didst lose thy way?"

"No, sir, my mother sent me."

"I thought so," cried Ebbo.  "This comes of sparing the nest of
thankless adders!"

"Nay," said Friedel, "mayhap it is because they are not thankless
that the poor fellow is here."

"Sir," said the boy, coming nearer, "I will tell YOU--YOU I will
tell--not him who threatens.  Mother said you spared our huts, and
the lady gave us bread when we came to the castle gate in winter, and
she would not see the reiters lay waste your folk's doings down there
without warning you."

"My good lad!  What saidst thou?" cried Ebbo, but the boy seemed dumb
before him, and Friedel repeated the question ere he answered:  "All
the lanzknechts and reiters are at the castle, and the Herr Graf has
taken all my father's young sheep for them, a plague upon him.  And
our folk are warned to be at the muster rock to-morrow morn, each
with a bundle of straw and a pine brand; and Black Berend heard the
body squire say the Herr Graf had sworn not to go to the wars till
every stick at the ford be burnt, every stone drowned, every workman
hung."

Ebbo, in a transport of indignation and gratitude, thrust his hand
into his pouch, and threw the boy a handful of groschen, while
Friedel gave warm thanks, in the utmost haste, ere both brothers
sprang with headlong speed down the wild path, to take advantage of
the timely intelligence.

The little council of war was speedily assembled, consisting of the
barons, their mother, Master Moritz Schleiermacher, Heinz, and Hatto.
To bring up to the castle the workmen, their families, and the more
valuable implements, was at once decided; and Christina asked whether
there would be anything left worth defending, and whether the
Schlangenwalden might not expend their fury on the scaffold, which
could be newly supplied from the forest, the huts, which could be
quickly restored, and the stones, which could hardly be damaged.  The
enemy must proceed to the camp in a day or two, and the building
would be less assailable by their return; and, besides, it was
scarcely lawful to enter on a private war when the imperial banner
was in the field.

"Craving your pardon, gracious lady," said the architect, "that blame
rests with him who provokes the war.  See, lord baron, there is time
to send to Ulm, where the two guilds, our allies, will at once equip
their trained bands and despatch them.  We meanwhile will hold the
knaves in check, and, by the time our burghers come up, the snake
brood will have had such a lesson as they will not soon forget.  Said
I well, Herr Freiherr?"

"Right bravely," said Ebbo.  "It consorts not with our honour or
rights, with my pledges to Ulm, or the fame of my house, to shut
ourselves up and see the rogues work their will scatheless.  My own
score of men, besides the stouter masons, carpenters, and serfs, will
be fully enough to make the old serpent of the wood rue the day, even
without the aid of the burghers.  Not a word against it, dearest
mother.  None is so wise as thou in matters of peace, but honour is
here concerned."

"My question is," persevered the mother, "whether honour be not
better served by obeying the summons of the king against the infidel,
with the men thou hast called together at his behest?  Let the count
do his worst; he gives thee legal ground of complaint to lay before
the king and the League, and all may there be more firmly
established."

"That were admirable counsel, lady," said Schleiermacher, "well
suited to the honour-worthy guildmaster Sorel, and to our justice-
loving city; but, in matters of baronial rights and aggressions, king
and League are wont to help those that help themselves, and those
that are over nice as to law and justice come by the worst."

"Not the worst in the long run," said Friedel.

"Thine unearthly code will not serve us here, Friedel mine," returned
his brother.  "Did I not defend the work I have begun, I should be
branded as a weak fool.  Nor will I see the foes of my house insult
me without striking a fair stroke.  Hap what hap, the Debateable Ford
shall be debated!  Call in the serfs, Hatto, and arm them.  Mother,
order a good supper for them.  Master Moritz, let us summon thy
masons and carpenters, and see who is a good man with his hands among
them."

Christina saw that remonstrance was vain.  The days of peril and
violence were coming back again; and all she could take comfort in
was, that, if not wholly right, her son was far from wholly wrong,
and that with a free heart she could pray for a blessing on him and
on his arms.



CHAPTER XIX:  THE FIGHT AT THE FORD



By the early September sunrise the thicket beneath the pass was
sheltering the twenty well-appointed reiters of Adlerstein, each
standing, holding his horse by the bridle, ready to mount at the
instant.  In their rear were the serfs and artisans, some with axes,
scythes, or ploughshares, a few with cross-bows, and Jobst and his
sons with the long blackened poles used for stirring their charcoal
fires.  In advance were Master Moritz and the two barons, the former
in a stout plain steel helmet, cuirass, and gauntlets, a sword, and
those new-fashioned weapons, pistols; the latter in full knightly
armour, exactly alike, from the gilt-spurred heel to the eagle-
crested helm, and often moving restlessly forward to watch for the
enemy, though taking care not to be betrayed by the glitter of their
mail.  So long did they wait that there was even a doubt whether it
might not have been a false alarm; the boy was vituperated, and it
was proposed to despatch a spy to see whether anything were doing at
Schlangenwald.

At length a rustling and rushing were heard; then a clank of armour.
Ebbo vaulted into the saddle, and gave the word to mount;
Schleiermacher, who always fought on foot, stepped up to him.  "Keep
back your men, Herr Freiherr.  Let his design be manifest.  We must
not be said to have fallen on him on his way to the muster."

"It would be but as he served my father!" muttered Ebbo, forced,
however, to restrain himself, though with boiling blood, as the tramp
of horses shook the ground, and bright armour became visible on the
further side of the stream.

For the first time, the brothers beheld the foe of their line.  He
was seated on a clumsy black horse, and sheathed in full armour, and
was apparently a large heavy man, whose powerful proportions were
becoming unwieldy as he advanced in life.  The dragon on his crest
and shield would have made him known to the twins, even without the
deadly curse that passed the Schneiderlein's lips at the sight.  As
the armed troop, out-numbering the Adlersteiners by about a dozen,
and followed by a rabble with straw and pine brands, came forth on
the meadow, the count halted and appeared to be giving orders.

"The ruffian!  He is calling them on!  Now--" began Ebbo.

"Nay, there is no sign yet that he is not peacefully on his journey
to the camp," responded Moritz; and, chafing with impatient fury, the
knight waited while Schlangenwald rode towards the old channel of the
Braunwasser, and there, drawing his rein, and sitting like a statue
in his stirrups, he could hear him shout:  "The lazy dogs are not
astir yet.  We will give them a reveille.  Forward with your brands!"

"Now!" and Ebbo's cream-coloured horse leapt forth, as the whole band
flashed into the sunshine from the greenwood covert.

"Who troubles the workmen on my land?" shouted Ebbo.

"Who you may be I care not," replied the count, "but when I find
strangers unlicensed on my lands, I burn down their huts.  On,
fellows!"

"Back, fellows!" called Ebbo.  "Whoso touches a stick on Adlerstein
ground shall suffer."

"So!" said the count, "this is the burgher-bred, burgher-fed varlet,
that calls himself of Adlerstein!  Boy, thou had best be warned.
Wert thou true-blooded, it were worth my while to maintain my rights
against thee.  Craven as thou art, not even with spirit to accept my
feud, I would fain not have the trouble of sweeping thee from my
path."

"Herr Graf, as true Freiherr and belted knight, I defy thee!  I
proclaim my right to this ground, and whoso damages those I place
there must do battle with me."

"Thou wilt have it then," said the count, taking his heavy lance from
his squire, closing his visor, and wheeling back his horse, so as to
give space for his career.

Ebbo did the like, while Friedel on one side, and Hierom von
Schlangenwald on the other, kept their men in array, awaiting the
issue of the strife between their leaders--the fire of seventeen
against the force of fifty-six.

They closed in full shock, with shivered lances and rearing, pawing
horses, but without damage to either.  Each drew his sword, and they
were pressing together, when Heinz, seeing a Schlangenwalder aiming
with his cross-bow, rode at him furiously, and the melee became
general; shots were fired, not only from cross-bows, but from
arquebuses, and in the throng Friedel lost sight of the main combat
between his brother and the count.

Suddenly however there was a crash, as of falling men and horses,
with a shout of victory strangely mingled with a cry of agony, and
both sides became aware that their leaders had fallen.  Each party
rushed to its fallen head.  Friedel beheld Ebbo under his struggling
horse, and an enemy dashing at his throat, and, flying to the rescue,
he rode down the assailant, striking him with his sword; and, with
the instinct of driving the foe as far as possible from his brother,
he struck with a sort of frenzy, shouting fiercely to his men, and
leaping over the dry bed of the river, rushing onward with an
intoxication of ardour that would have seemed foreign to his gentle
nature, but for the impetuous desire to protect his brother.  Their
leaders down, the enemy had no one to rally them, and, in spite of
their superiority in number, gave way in confusion before the furious
onset of Adlerstein.  So soon, however, as Friedel perceived that he
had forced the enemy far back from the scene of conflict, his anxiety
for his brother returned, and, leaving the retainers to continue the
pursuit, he turned his horse.  There, on the green meadow, lay on the
one hand Ebbo's cream-coloured charger, with his master under him, on
the other the large figure of the count; and several other prostrate
forms likewise struggled on the sand and pebbles of the strand, or on
the turf.

"Ay," said the architect, who had turned with Friedel, "'twas a
gallant feat, Sir Friedel, and I trust there is no great harm done.
Were it the mere dint of the count's sword, your brother will be
little the worse."

"Ebbo!  Ebbo mine, look up!" cried Friedel, leaping from his horse,
and unclasping his brother's helmet.

"Friedel!" groaned a half-suffocated voice.  "O take away the horse."

One or two of the artisans were at hand, and with their help the
dying steed was disengaged from the rider, who could not restrain his
moans, though Friedel held him in his arms, and endeavoured to move
him as gently as possible.  It was then seen that the deep gash from
the count's sword in the chest was not the most serious injury, but
that an arquebus ball had pierced his thigh, before burying itself in
the body of his horse; and that the limb had been further crushed and
wrenched by the animal's struggles.  He was nearly unconscious, and
gasped with anguish, but, after Moritz had bathed his face and
moistened his lips, as he lay in his brother's arms, he looked up
with clearer eyes, and said:  "Have I slain him?  It was the shot,
not he, that sent me down.  Lives he?  See--thou, Friedel--thou.
Make him yield."

Transferring Ebbo to the arms of Schleiermacher, Friedel obeyed, and
stepped towards the fallen foe.  The wrongs of Adlerstein were indeed
avenged, for the blood was welling fast from a deep thrust above the
collar-bone, and the failing, feeble hand was wandering uncertainly
among the clasps of the gorget.

"Let me aid," said Friedel, kneeling down, and in his pity for the
dying man omitting the summons to yield, he threw back the helmet,
and beheld a grizzled head and stern hard features, so embrowned by
weather and inflamed by intemperance, that even approaching death
failed to blanch them.  A scowl of malignant hate was in the eyes,
and there was a thrill of angry wonder as they fell on the lad's
face.  "Thou again,--thou whelp!  I thought at least I had made an
end of thee," he muttered, unheard by Friedel, who, intent on the
thought that had recurred to him with greater vividness than ever,
was again filling Ebbo's helmet with water.  He refreshed the dying
man's face with it, held it to his lips, and said:  "Herr Graf,
variance and strife are ended now.  For heaven's sake, say where I
may find my father!"

"So!  Wouldst find him?" replied Schlangenwald, fixing his look on
the eager countenance of the youth, while his hand, with a dying
man's nervous agitation, was fumbling at his belt.

"I would bless you for ever, could I but free him."

"Know then," said the count, speaking very slowly, and still holding
the young knight's gaze with a sort of intent fascination, by the
stony glare of his light gray eyes, "know that thy villain father is
a Turkish slave, unless he be--as I hope--where his mongrel son may
find him."

Therewith came a flash, a report; Friedel leaped back, staggered,
fell; Ebbo started to a sitting posture, with horrified eyes, and a
loud shriek, calling on his brother; Moritz sprang to his feet,
shouting, "Shame! treason!"

"I call you to witness that I had not yielded," said the count.
"There's an end of the brood!" and with a grim smile, he straightened
his limbs, and closed his eyes as a dead man, ere the indignant
artisans fell on him in savage vengeance.

All this had passed like a flash of lightning, and Friedel had almost
at the instant of his fall flung himself towards his brother, and
raising himself on one hand, with the other clasped Ebbo's, saying,
"Fear not; it is nothing," and he was bending to take Ebbo's head
again on his knee, when a gush of dark blood, from his left side,
caused Moritz to exclaim, "Ah!  Sir Friedel, the traitor did his
work!  That is no slight hurt."

"Where?  How?  The ruffian!" cried Ebbo, supporting himself on his
elbow, so as to see his brother, who rather dreamily put his hand to
his side, and, looking at the fresh blood that immediately dyed it,
said, "I do not feel it.  This is more numb dulness than pain."

"A bad sign that," said Moritz, apart to one of the workmen, with
whom he held counsel how to carry back to the castle the two young
knights, who remained on the bank, Ebbo partly extended on the
ground, partly supported on the knee and arm of Friedel, who sat with
his head drooping over him, their looks fixed on one another, as if
conscious of nothing else on earth.

"Herr Freiherr," said Moritz, presently, "have you breath to wind
your bugle to call the men back from the pursuit?"

Ebbo essayed, but was too faint, and Friedel, rousing himself from
the stupor, took the horn from him, and made the mountain echoes ring
again, but at the expense of a great effusion of blood.

By this time, however, Heinz was riding back, and a moment his
exultation changed to rage and despair, when he saw the condition of
his young lords.  Master Schleiermacher proposed to lay them on some
of the planks prepared for the building, and carry them up the new
road.

"Methinks," said Friedel, "that I could ride if I were lifted on
horseback, and thus would our mother be less shocked."

"Well thought," said Ebbo.  "Go on and cheer her.  Show her thou
canst keep the saddle, however it may be with me," he added, with a
groan of anguish.

Friedel made the sign of the cross over him.  "The holy cross keep us
and her, Ebbo," he said, as he bent to assist in laying his brother
on the boards, where a mantle had been spread; then kissed his brow,
saying, "We shall be together again soon."

Ebbo was lifted on the shoulders of his bearers, and Friedel strove
to rise, with the aid of Heinz, but sank back, unable to use his
limbs; and Schleiermacher was the more concerned.  "It goes so with
the backbone," he said.  "Sir Friedmund, you had best be carried."

"Nay, for my mother's sake!  And I would fain be on my good steed's
back once again!" he entreated.  And when with much difficulty he had
been lifted to the back of his cream-colour, who stood as gently and
patiently as if he understood the exigency of the moment, he sat
upright, and waved his hand as he passed the litter, while Ebbo, on
his side, signed to him to speed on and prepare their mother.  Long,
however, before the castle was reached, dizzy confusion and leaden
helplessness, when no longer stimulated by his brother's presence, so
grew on him that it was with much ado that Heinz could keep him in
his saddle; but, when he saw his mother in the castle gateway, he
again collected his forces, bade Heinz withdraw his supporting arm,
and, straightening himself, waved a greeting to her, as he called
cheerily; "Victory, dear mother.  Ebbo has overthrown the count, and
you must not be grieved if it be at some cost of blood."

"Alas, my son!" was all Christina could say, for his effort at gaiety
formed a ghastly contrast with the gray, livid hue that overspread
his fair young face, his bloody armour, and damp disordered hair, and
even his stiff unearthly smile.

"Nay, motherling," he added, as she came so near that he could put
his arm round her neck, "sorrow not, for Ebbo will need thee much.
And, mother," as his face lighted up, "there is joy coming to you.
Only I would that I could have brought him.  Mother, he died not
under the Schlangenwald swords."

"Who?  Not Ebbo?" cried the bewildered mother.

"Your own Eberhard, our father," said Friedel, raising her face to
him with his hand, and adding, as he met a startled look, "The cruel
count owned it with his last breath.  He is a Turkish slave, and
surely heaven will give him back to comfort you, even though we may
not work his freedom!  O mother, I had so longed for it, but God be
thanked that at least certainty was bought by my life."  The last
words were uttered almost unconsciously, and he had nearly fallen, as
the excitement faded; but, as they were lifting him down, he bent
once more and kissed the glossy neck of his horse.  "Ah! poor fellow,
thou too wilt be lonely.  May Ebbo yet ride thee!"

The mother had no time for grief.  Alas!  She might have full time
for that by and by!  The one wish of the twins was to be together,
and presently both were laid on the great bed in the upper chamber,
Ebbo in a swoon from the pain of the transport, and Friedel lying so
as to meet the first look of recovery.  And, after Ebbo's eyes had
re-opened, they watched one another in silence for a short space,
till Ebbo said:  "Is that the hue of death on thy face, brother?"

"I well believe so," said Friedel.

"Ever together," said Ebbo, holding his hand.  "But alas!  My mother!
Would I had never sent thee to the traitor."

"Ah!  So comes her comfort," said Friedel.  "Heard you not?  He owned
that my father was among the Turks."

"And I," cried Ebbo.  "I have withheld thee!  O Friedel, had I
listened to thee, thou hadst not been in this fatal broil!"

"Nay, ever together," repeated Friedel.  "Through Ulm merchants will
my mother be able to ransom him.  I know she will, so oft have I
dreamt of his return.  Then, mother, you will give him our duteous
greetings;" and he smiled again.

Like one in a dream Christina returned his smile, because she saw he
wished it, just as the moment before she had been trying to staunch
his wound.

It was plain that the injuries, except Ebbo's sword-cut, were far
beyond her skill, and she could only endeavour to check the bleeding
till better aid could be obtained from Ulm.  Thither Moritz
Schleiermacher had already sent, and he assured her that he was far
from despairing of the elder baron, but she derived little hope from
his words, for gunshot wounds were then so ill understood as
generally to prove fatal.

Moreover, there was an undefined impression that the two lives must
end in the same hour, even as they had begun.  Indeed, Ebbo was
suffering so terribly, and was so much spent with pain and loss of
blood, that he seemed sinking much faster than Friedel, whose wound
bled less freely, and who only seemed benumbed and torpid, except
when he roused himself to speak, or was distressed by the writhings
and moans which, however, for his sake, Ebbo restrained as much as he
could.

To be together seemed an all-sufficient consolation, and, when the
chaplain came sorrowfully to give them the last rites of the Church,
Ebbo implored him to pray that he might not be left behind long in
purgatory.

"Friedel," he said, clasping his brother's hand, "is even like the
holy Sebastian or Maurice; but I--I was never such as he.  O father,
will it be my penance to be left alone when he is in paradise?"

"What is that?" said Friedel, partially roused by the sound of his
name, and the involuntary pressure of his hand.  "Nay, Ebbo; one
repentance, one cross, one hope," and he relapsed into a doze, while
Ebbo murmured over a broken, brief confession--exhausting by its
vehemence of self-accusation for his proud spirit, his wilful neglect
of his lost father, his hot contempt of prudent counsel.

Then, when the priest came round to Friedel's side, and the boy was
wakened to make his shrift, the words were contrite and humble, but
calm and full of trust.  They were like two of their own mountain
streams, the waters almost equally undefiled by external stain--yet
one struggling, agitated, whirling giddily round; the other still,
transparent, and the light of heaven smiling in its clearness.

The farewell greetings of the Church on earth breathed soft and sweet
in their loftiness, and Friedel, though lying motionless, and with
closed eyes, never failed in the murmured response, whether fully
conscious or not, while his brother only attended by fits and starts,
and was evidently often in too much pain to know what was passing.

Help was nearer than had been hoped.  The summons despatched the
night before had been responded to by the vintners and mercers; their
train bands had set forth, and their captain, a cautious man, never
rode into the way of blows without his surgeon at hand.  And so it
came to pass that, before the sun was low on that long and grievous
day, Doctor Johannes Butteman was led into the upper chamber, where
the mother looked up to him with a kind of hopeless gratitude on her
face, which was nearly as white as those of her sons.  The doctor
soon saw that Friedel was past human aid; but, when he declared that
there was fair hope for the other youth, Friedel, whose torpor had
been dispelled by the examination, looked up with his beaming smile,
saying, "There, motherling."

The doctor then declared that he could not deal with the Baron's
wound unless he were the sole occupant of the bed, and this sentence
brought the first cloud of grief or dread to Friedel's brow, but only
for a moment.  He looked at his brother, who had again fainted at the
first touch of his wounded limb, and said, "It is well.  Tell the
dear Ebbo that I cannot help it if after all I go to the praying, and
leave him the fighting.  Dear, dear Ebbo!  One day together again and
for ever!  I leave thee for thine own sake."  With much effort he
signed the cross again on his brother's brow, and kissed it long and
fervently.  Then, as all stood round, reluctant to effect this
severance, or disturb one on whom death was visibly fast approaching,
he struggled up on his elbow, and held out the other hand, saying,
"Take me now, Heinz, ere Ebbo revive to be grieved.  The last
sacrifice," he further whispered, whilst almost giving himself to
Heinz and Moritz to be carried to his own bed in the turret chamber.

There, even as they laid him down, began what seemed to be the mortal
agony, and, though he was scarcely sensible, his mother felt that her
prime call was to him, while his brother was in other hands.  Perhaps
it was well for her.  Surgical practice was rough, and wounds made by
fire-arms were thought to have imbibed a poison that made treatment
be supposed efficacious in proportion to the pain inflicted.  When
Ebbo was recalled by the torture to see no white reflection of his
own face on the pillow beside him, and to feel in vain for the grasp
of the cold damp hand, a delirious frenzy seized him, and his
struggles were frustrating the doctor's attempts, when a low soft
sweet song stole through the open door.

"Friedel!" he murmured, and held his breath to listen.  All through
the declining day did the gentle sound continue; now of grand chants
or hymns caught from the cathedral choir, now of songs of chivalry or
saintly legend so often sung over the evening fire; the one flowing
into the other in the wandering of failing powers, but never failing
in the tender sweetness that had distinguished Friedel through life.
And, whenever that voice was heard, let them do to him what they
would, Ebbo was still absorbed in intense listening so as not to lose
a note, and lulled almost out of sense of suffering by that swan-like
music.  If his attendants made such noise as to break in on it, or if
it ceased for a moment, the anguish returned, but was charmed away by
the weakest, faintest resumption of the song.  Probably Friedel knew
not, with any earthly sense, what he was doing, but to the very last
he was serving his twin brother as none other could have aided him in
his need.

The September sun had set, twilight was coming on, the doctor h