the first
time a fellow-feeling for him, and a sense that he was one of the
true old stock; but, when he heard of the release, he growled, "So!
How would a lad have fared who so acted in my time?  My poor old
mother!  She must have been changed indeed not to have scourged him
till he had no strength to cry out."

"He was my prisoner!" said Ebbo, in his old defiant tone; "I had the
right."

"Ah, well! the Junker has always been master here, and I never!" said
the elder knight, looking round rather piteously; and Ebbo, with a
sudden movement, exclaimed, "Nay, sir, you are the only lord and
master, and I stand ready to be the first to obey you."

"You!  A fine young book-learned scholar, already knighted, and with
all these Wildschloss lands too!" said Sir Eberhard, gazing with a
strange puzzled look at the delicate but spirited features of this
strange perplexing son.  "Reach hither your hand, boy."

And as he compared the slender, shapely hand of such finely-textured
skin with the breadth of his own horny giant's paw, he tossed it from
him, shaking his head with a gesture as if he had no commands for
such feminine-looking fingers to execute, and mortifying Ebbo not a
little.  "Ah!" said Christina, apologetically, "it always grieved
your mother that the boys would resemble me and mine.  But, when
daylight comes, Ebbo will show you that he has not lost the old
German strength."

"No doubt--no doubt," said Sir Eberhard, hastily, "since he has slain
Schlangenwald; and, if the former state of things be at an end, the
less he takes after the ancient stock the better.  But I am an old
man now, Stine, though thou look'st fair and fresh as ever, and I do
not know what to make of these things.  White napery on the table;
glass drinking things;--nay, were it not for thee and the
Schneiderlein, I should not know I was at home."

He was led back to his narration, and it appeared that, after some
years spent at the oar, certain bleedings from the lungs, the remains
of his wound, had become so much more severe as to render him useless
for naval purposes; and, as he escaped actually dying during a
voyage, he was allowed to lie by on coming into port till he had in
some degree recovered, and then had been set to labour at the
fortifications, chained to another prisoner, and toiling between the
burning sand and burning sun, but treated with less horrible severity
than the necessities of the sea had occasioned on board ship, and
experiencing the benefit of intercourse with the better class of
captives, whom their miserable fate had thrown into the hands of the
Moors.

It was a favourite almsdeed among the Provencals, Spaniards, and
Italians to send money for the redemption of prisoners to the Moors,
and there was a regular agency for ransoms through the Jews; but
German captives were such an exception that no one thought of them,
and many a time had the summons come for such and such a slave by
name, or for five poor Sicilians, twenty Genoese, a dozen
Marseillais, or the like, but still no word for the Swabian; till he
had made up his mind that he should either leave his bones in the hot
mud of the harbour, or be only set free by some gallant descent
either of the brave King of Portugal, or of the Knights of Rhodes, of
whom the captives were ever dreaming and whispering.

At length his own slave name was shouted; he was called up by the
captain of his gang, and, while expecting some fresh punishment, or,
maybe, to find himself sold into some domestic form of slavery, he
was set before a Jewish agent, who, after examining him on his name,
country, and station, and comparing his answers with a paper of
instructions, informed him that he was ransomed, caused his fetters
to be struck off, and shipped him off at once for Genoa, with orders
to the captain to consign him to the merchant Signor del Battiste.
By him Sir Eberhard had been received with the warmest hospitality,
and treated as befitted his original station, but Battista disclaimed
the merit of having ransomed him.  He had but acted, he said, as the
agent of an Austrian gentleman, from whom he had received orders to
inquire after the Swabian baron who had been his fellow-captive, and,
if he were still living, to pay his ransom, and bring him home.

"The name--the name!" eagerly asked Ebbo and his mother at once.

"The name?  Gian was wont to make bad work of our honest German
names, but I tried to learn this--being so beholden to him.  I even
caused it to be spelt over to me, but my letters long ago went from
me.  It seems to me that the man is a knight-errant, like those of
thy ballads, Stine--one Ritter Theur--Theur--"

"Theurdank!" cried Ebbo.

"Ay, Theurdank.  What, you know him?  There is nothing you and your
mother don't know, I believe."

"Know him!  Father, he is our greatest and noblest!  He has been kind
to me beyond description.  He is the Kaisar!  Now I see why he had
that strange arch look which so vexed me when he forbade me on my
allegiance to set forth till my lameness should be gone!  Long ago
had he asked me all about Gian Battista.  To him he must have
written."

"The Kaisar!" said Sir Eberhard.  "Nay, the poor fellows I left in
Turkey ever said he was too close of fist for them to have hope from
him."

"Oh! that was old Kaisar Friedrich.  This is our own gallant
Maximilian--a knight as true and brave as ever was paladin," said
Christina; "and most truly loving and prizing our Ebbo."

"And yet I wish--I wish," said Ebbo, "that he had let me win my
father's liberty for myself."

"Yea, well," said his father, "there spoke the Adlerstein.  We never
were wont to be beholden to king or kaisar."

"Nay," say Ebbo, after a moment's recollection, colouring as he
spoke; "it is true that I deserved it not.  Nay, Sir Father, it is
well.  You owe your freedom in very truth to the son you have not
known.  It was he who treasured up the thought of the captive German
described by the merchant, and even dreamt of it, while never
doubting of your death; it was he who caught up Schlangenwald's first
hint that you lived, while I, in my pride, passed it by as merely
meant to perplex me; it was he who had formed an absolute purpose of
obtaining some certainty; and at last, when my impetuosity had
brought on the fatal battle, it was he who bought with his own life
the avowal of your captivity.  I had hoped to have fulfilled
Friedel's trust, and to have redeemed my own backwardness; but it is
not to be.  While I was yet lying helpless on my bed, the Emperor has
taken it out of my power.  Mother, you receive him from Friedel's
hands, after all."

"And well am I thankful that so it should be," said Christina.  "Ah,
Ebbo! sorely should I have pined with anxiety when thou wast gone.
And thy father knows that thou hadst the full purpose."

"Yea, I know it," said the old man; "and, after all, small blame to
him even if he had not.  He never saw me, and light grieves the heart
for what the eye hath not seen."

"But," added the wife, "since the Romish king freed you, dear lord,
cared he not better for your journey than to let you come in this
forlorn plight?"

This, it appeared, was far from being his deliverer's fault.  Money
had been supplied, and Sir Eberhard had travelled as far as Aosta
with a party of Italian merchants; but no sooner had he parted with
them than he was completely astray.  His whole experience of life had
been as a robber baron or as a slave, and he knew not how to take
care of himself as a peaceful traveller; he suffered fresh extortions
at every stage, and after a few days was plundered by his guides,
beaten, and left devoid of all means of continuing the journey to
which he could hardly hope for a cheerful end.  He did not expect to
find his mother living,--far less that his unowned wife could have
survived the perils in which he had involved her; and he believed
that his ancestral home would, if not a ruin, be held by his foes, or
at best by the rival branch of the family, whose welcome of the
outlawed heir would probably be to a dungeon, if not a halter.  Yet
the only magnet on earth for the lonely wanderer was his native
mountain, where from some old peasant he might learn how his fair
young bride had perished, and perhaps the sins of his youth might be
expiated by continual prayer in the hermitage chapel where his sister
lay buried, and whence he could see the crags for which his eye and
heart had craved so long with the home-sickness of a mountaineer.

And now, when his own Christina had welcomed him with all the
overflow of her loving heart, unchanged save that hers had become a
tenderer yet more dignified loveliness; when his gallant son, in all
the bloom of young manhood, received him with dutiful submission;
when the castle, in a state of defence, prosperity, and comfort of
which he had never dreamt, was again his own;--still the old man was
bewildered, and sometimes oppressed almost to distress.  He had, as
it were, fallen asleep in one age of the world, and wakened in
another, and it seemed as if he really wished to defer his wakening,
or else that repose was an absolute novelty to him; for he sat dozing
in his chair in the sun the whole of the next day, and scarcely
spoke.

Ebbo, who felt it a necessity to come to an understanding of the
terms on which they were to stand, tried to refer matters to him, and
to explain the past, but he was met sometimes by a shake of the head,
sometimes by a nod--not of assent, but of sleep; and his mother
advised him not to harass the wearied traveller, but to leave him to
himself at least for that day, and let him take his own time for
exertion, letting things meantime go on as usual.  Ebbo obeyed, but
with a load at his heart, as he felt that all he was doing was but
provisional, and that it would be his duty to resign all that he had
planned, and partly executed, to this incompetent, ignorant rule.  He
could certainly, when not serving the Emperor, go and act for himself
at Thekla's dower castle of Felsenbach, and his mother might save
things from going to utter ruin at Adlerstein; but no reflection or
self-reproach could make it otherwise than a bitter pill to any
Telemachus to have to resign to one so unlike Ulysses in all but the
length of his wanderings,--one, also, who seemed only half to like,
and not at all to comprehend, his Telemachus.

Meantime Ebbo attended to such matters as were sure to come each day
before the Herr Freiherr.  Now it was a question whether the stone
for the mill should be quarried where it would undermine a bit of
grass land, or further on, where the road was rougher; now Berend's
swine had got into Barthel's rye, and Barthel had severely hurt one
of them--the Herr Freiherr's interference could alone prevent a
hopeless quarrel; now a waggon with ironwork for the mill claimed
exemption from toll as being for the Baron:  and he must send down
the toll, to obviate injustice towards Schlangenwald and Ulm.  Old
Ulrich's grandson, who had run away for a lanzknecht, had sent a
letter home (written by a comrade), the Baron must read and answer
it.  Steinmark's son wanted to be a poor student:  the Herr Freiherr
must write him a letter of recommendation.  Mother Grethel's ewe had
fallen into a cleft; her son came to borrow a rope, and ask aid, and
the Baron must superintend the hoisting the poor beast up again.
Hans had found the track of a wolf, and knew the hole where a litter
of cubs abode; the Freiherr, his wolf-hound, and his spear were
wanted for their destruction.  Dietrich could not tell how to manage
his new arquebus:  the Baron must teach him to take aim.  Then there
was a letter from Ulm to invite the Baron to consult on the tax
demanded by the Emperor for his Italian war, and how far it should
concern the profits of the bridge; and another letter from the
Markgraf of Wurtemburg, as chief of the Swabian League, requesting
the Lord of Adlerstein to be on the look-out for a band of robbers,
who were reported to be in neighbouring hills, after being hunted out
of some of their other lurking-places.

That very night, or rather nearly at the dawn of a summer morning,
there was a yelling below the castle, and a flashing of torches, and
tidings rang through it that a boor on the outskirts of the mountain
had had his ricks fired and his cattle driven by the robbers, and his
young daughters carried off.  Old Sir Eberhard hobbled down to the
hall in time to see weapons flashing as they were dealt out, to hear
a clear decided voice giving orders, to listen to the tramp of horse,
and watch more reitern pass out under the gateway than ever the
castle had counted in his father's time.  Then he went back to his
bed, and when he came down in the morning, found all the womankind of
the castle roasting and boiling.  And, at noon, little Thekla came
rushing down from the watch-tower with news that all were coming home
up the Eagle's Steps, and she was sure HER baron had sent her, and
waved to her.  Soon after, HER baron in his glittering steel rode his
cream-coloured charger (once Friedel's) into the castle court,
followed by his exultant merrymen.  They had overtaken the thieves in
good time, made them captives, and recovered the spoil unhurt; and
Heinz and Koppel made the castle ring with the deed of their young
lord, who had forced the huge leader of the band to the earth, and
kept him down by main strength till they could come to bind him.

"By main strength?" slowly asked Sir Eberhard, who had been stirred
into excitement.

"He was a loose-limbed, awkward fellow," said Ebbo, "less strong than
he looked."

"Not only that, Sir," said Heinz, looking from his old master to his
young one; "but old iron is not a whit stronger than new steel,
though the one looks full of might, and you would think the other but
a toy."

"And what have you done with the rogues' heads?" asked the old
knight.  "I looked to see them on your spears.  Or have you hung
them?"

"Not so, Sir," said Ebbo.  "I sent the men off to Stuttgard with an
escort.  I dislike doing execution ourselves; it makes the men so
lawless.  Besides, this farmer was Schlangenwalder."

"And yet he came to you for redress?"

"Yes, for Sir Dankwart is at his commandery, and he and I agreed to
look after each other's lands."

Sir Eberhard retired to his chair as if all had gone past his
understanding, and thence he looked on while his son and wife
hospitably regaled, and then dismissed, their auxiliaries in the
rescue.

Afterwards Christina told her son that she thought his father was
rested, and would be better able to attend to him, and Ebbo, with a
painful swelling in his heart, approached him deferentially, with a
request that he would say what was his pleasure with regard to the
Emperor, to whom acknowledgments must in the first place be made for
his release, and next would arise the whole question of homage and
investiture.

"Look you here, fair son," said Sir Eberhard, rousing himself, "these
things are all past me.  I'll have none of them.  You and your Kaisar
understand one another, and your homage is paid.  It boots not
changing all for an old fellow that is but come home to die."

"Nay, father, it is in the order of things that you should be lord
here."

"I never was lord here, and, what is more, I would not, and could not
be.  Son, I marked you yesterday.  You are master as never was my
poor father, with all the bawling and blows that used to rule the
house, while these fellows mind you at a word, in a voice as quiet as
your mother's.  Besides, what should I do with all these mills and
bridges of yours, and Diets, and Leagues, and councils enough to
addle a man's brain?  No, no; I could once slay a bear, or strike a
fair stroke at a Schlangenwalder, but even they got the better of me,
and I am good for nothing now but to save my soul.  I had thought to
do it as a hermit up there; but my little Christina thinks the saints
will be just as well pleased if I tell my beads here, with her to
help me, and I know that way I shall not make so many mistakes.  So,
young Sir, if you can give the old man a corner of the hearth while
he lives, he will never interfere with you.  And, maybe, if the
castle were in jeopardy in your absence, with that new-fangled road
up to it, he could tell the fellows how to hold it out."

"Sir--dear father," cried the ardent Ebbo, "this is not a fit state
of things.  I will spare you all trouble and care; only make me not
undutiful; take your own place.  Mother, convince him!"

"No, my son," said Sir Eberhard; "your mother sees what is best for
me.  I only want to be left to her to rest a little while, and repent
of my sinful life.  As Heinz says, the rusty old iron must lie by
while the new steel does the work.  It is quiet that I need.  It is
joy enough for me to see what she has made you, and all around.  Ah!
Stine, my white dove, I knew thine was a wise head; but when I left
thee, gentle little frightened, fluttering thing, how little could I
have thought that all alone, unaided, thou wouldst have kept that
little head above water, and made thy son work out all these changes-
-thy doing--and so I know they are good and seemly.  I see thou hast
made him clerkly, quick-witted, and yet a good knight.  Ah! thou
didst tell me oft that our lonely pride was not high nor worthy fame.
Stine, how didst do it?"

"I did it not, dear husband; God did it for me.  He gave the boys the
loving, true tempers that worked out the rest!  He shielded them and
me in our days of peril."

"Yes, father," added Ebbo, "Providence guarded us; but, above all,
our chief blessing has been the mother who has made one of us a holy
saint, and taught the other to seek after him!  Father, I am glad you
see how great has been the work of the Dove you brought to the
Eagle's Nest."



CHAPTER XXV:  THE STAR AND THE SPARK



The year 1531 has begun, and Schloss Adlerstein remains in its
strength on the mountain side, but with a look of cultivation on its
environs such as would have amazed Kunigunde.  Vines run up trellises
against the rocks; pot-herbs and flowers nestle in the nooks;
outbuildings cluster round it; and even the grim old keep has a range
of buildings connected with it, as if the household had entirely
outgrown the capacities of the square tower.

Yet the old hall is still the chief place of assembly, and now that
it has been wainscoted, with a screen of carved wood to shut off the
draughty passages, and a stove of bright tiles to increase the
warmth, it is far more cheerful.  Moreover, a window has been opened
showing the rich green meadow below, with the bridge over the
Braunwasser, and the little church, with a spire of pierced lace-
work, and white cottages peeping out of the retreating forest.

That is the window which the Lady Baroness loves.  See her there, the
lovely old lady of seventy-five--yes, lovelier than ever, for her
sweet brown eyes have the same pensive, clear beauty, enhanced by the
snowy whiteness of her hair, of which a soft braid shows over the
pure pale brow beneath the white band, and sweeping black veil, that
she has worn by right for twenty years.  But the slight form is
active and brisk, and there are ready smiles and looks of interest
for the pretty fair-haired maidens, three in number, who run in and
out from their household avocations to appeal to the "dear
grandmother," mischievously to tell of the direful yawns proceeding
from brothers Ebbo and Gottfried over their studies with their tutor,
or to gaze from the window and wonder if the father, with the two
brothers, Friedel Max and Kasimir, will return from Ulm in time for
the "mid-day eating."

Ah! there they are.  Quick-eyed Vittoria has seen the cavalcade
first, and dances off to tell Ermentrude and Stine time enough to
prepare their last batch of fritters for the new-comers; Ebbo and
Gotz rush headlong down the hillside; and the Lady Baroness lays down
her distaff, and gazes with eyes of satisfied content at the small
party of horsemen climbing up the footpath.  Then, when they have
wound out of sight round a rock, she moves out towards the hall-door,
with a light, quick step, for never yet has she resigned her great
enjoyment, that of greeting her son on the steps of the porch--those
steps where she once met such fearful news, but where that memory has
been effaced by many a cheerful welcome.

There, then, she stands, amid the bright throng of grandchildren,
while the Baron and his sons spring from their horses and come up to
her.  The Baron doffs his Spanish hat, bends the knee, kisses her
hand, and receives her kiss on his brow, with the fervour of a life-
devotion, before he turns to accept the salutation of his daughters,
and then takes her hand, with pretty affectionate ceremony, to hand
her back to her seat.  A few words pass between them.  "No,
motherling," he says, "I signed it not; I will tell you all by and
by."

And then the mid-day meal is served for the whole household, as of
old, with the salt-cellar in the middle, but with a far larger
company above it than when first we saw it.  The seven young folks
preserve a decorous silence, save when Fraulein Ermentrude's
cookeries are good-naturedly complimented by her father, or when
Baron Friedmund Maximilianus breaks out with some wonderful fact
about new armour seen at Ulm.  He is a handsome, fair, flaxen-haired
young man--like the old Adlersteins, say the elder people--and full
of honest gaiety and good nature, the special pride of his sisters;
and no sooner is the meal over, than, with a formal entreaty for
dismissal, all the seven, and all the dogs, move off together, to
that favourite gathering-place round the stove, where all their merry
tongues are let loose together.

To them, the Herr Vater and the Frau Grossmutter seem nearly of the
same age, and of the same generation; and verily the eighteen years
between the mother and son have dwindled into a very small difference
even in appearance, and a lesser one in feeling.  She is a youthful,
beautiful old lady; he a grave, spare, worn, elderly man, in his full
strength, but with many a trace of care and thought, and far more of
silver than of brown in his thin hair and pointed beard, and with a
melancholy thoughtfulness in his clear brown eyes--all well
corresponding with the gravity of the dress in which he has been
meeting the burghers of Ulm; a black velvet suit--only relieved by
his small white lace ruff, and the ribbon and jewel of the Golden
Fleece, the only other approach to ornament that he wears being that
ring long ago twisted off the Emperor Maximilian's chain.  But now,
as he has bowed off the chaplain to his study, and excused himself
from aiding his two gentlemen-squires in consuming their krug of
beer, and hands his mother to her favourite nook in the sunny window,
taking his seat by her side, his features assume an expression of
repose and relaxation as if here indeed were his true home.  He has
chosen his seat in full view of a picture that hangs on the
wainscoted wall, near his mother--a picture whose pure ethereal
tinting, of colour limpid as the rainbow, yet rich as the most
glowing flower-beds; and its soft lovely pose, and rounded outlines,
prove it to be no produce even of one of the great German artists of
the time, but to have been wrought, under an Italian sky, by such a
hand as left us the marvellous smile of Mona Lisa.  It represents two
figures, one unmistakably himself when in the prime of life, his brow
and cheeks unfurrowed, and his hair still thick, shining brown, but
with the same grave earnestness of the dark eye that came with the
early sense of responsibility, and with the first sorrow of his
youth.  The other figure, one on which the painter evidently loved to
dwell, is of a lady, so young that she might almost pass for his
daughter, except for the peculiar, tender sweetness that could only
become the wife and mother.  Fair she is as snow, with scarce a
deepening of the rose on cheek, or even lip, fragile and transparent
as a spiritual form, and with a light in the blue eyes, and a grace
in the soft fugitive smile, that scarce seems to belong to earth; a
beauty not exactly of feature, but rather the pathetic loveliness of
calm fading away--as if she were already melting into the clear blue
sky with the horizon of golden light, that the wondrous power of art
has made to harmonize with, but not efface, her blue dress, golden
hair, white coif, and fair skin.  It is as if she belonged to that
sky, and only tarried as unable to detach herself from the clasp of
the strong hand round and in which both her hands are twined; and
though the light in her face may be from heaven, yet the whole
countenance is fixed in one absorbed, almost worshipping gaze of her
husband, with a wistful simplicity and innocence on devotion, like
the absorption of a loving animal, to whom its master's presence is
bliss and sunshine.  It is a picture to make light in a dark place,
and that sweet face receives a loving glance, nay, an absolutely
reverent bend of the knightly head, as the Baron seats himself.

"So it was as we feared, and this Schmalkaldic League did not suit
thy sense of loyalty, my son?" she asks, reading his features
anxiously.

"No, mother.  I ever feared that further pressure would drive our
friends beyond the line where begin schism and rebellion; and it
seems to me that the moment is come when I must hold me still, or
transgress mine own sense of duty.  I must endure the displeasure of
many I love and respect."

"Surely, my son, they have known you too long and too well not to
respect your motives, and know that conscience is first with you."

"Scarce may such confidence be looked for, mother, from the most
part, who esteem every man a traitor to the cause if he defend it not
precisely in the fashion of their own party.  But I hear that the
King of France has offered himself as an ally, and that Dr. Luther,
together with others of our best divines, have thereby been startled
into doubts of the lawfulness of the League."

"And what think you of doing, my son?"

"I shall endeavour to wait until such time as the much-needed General
Council may proclaim the ancient truth, and enable us to avouch it
without disunion.  Into schism I WILL not be drawn.  I have held
truth all my life in the Church, nor will I part from her now.  If
intrigues again should prevail, then, Heaven help us!  Meantime,
mother, the best we can, as has ever been your war-cry."

"And much has been won for us.  Here are the little maidens, who,
save Vittoria, would never have been scholars, reading the Holy Word
daily in their own tongue."

"Ach, I had not told you, mother!  I have the Court Secretary's
answer this day about that command in the Kaisar's guards that my
dear old master had promised to his godson."

"Another put-off with Flemish courtesy, I see by thy face, Ebbo."

"Not quite that, mother.  The command is ready for the Baron
Friedmund Maximilianus von Adlerstein Wildschloss, and all the rest
of it, on the understanding that he has been bred up free from all
taint of the new doctrine."

"New?  Nay, it is the oldest of all doctrine."

"Even so.  As I ever said, Dr. Luther hath been setting forth in
greater clearness and fulness what our blessed Friedel and I learnt
at your knee, and my young ones have learnt from babyhood of the true
Catholic doctrine.  Yet I may not call my son's faith such as the
Kaisar's Spanish conscience-keepers would have it, and so the boy
must e'en tarry at home till there be work for his stout arm to do."

"He seems little disappointed.  His laugh comes ringing the loudest
of all."

"The Junker is more of a boy at two-and-twenty than I ever recollect
myself!  He lacks not sense nor wit, but a fray or a feast, a chase
or a dance, seem to suffice him at an age when I had long been
dwelling on matters of moment."

"Thou wast left to be thine own pilot; he is but one of thy gay crew,
and thus even these stirring times touch him not so deeply as thou
wert affected by thine own choice in life between disorderly freedom
and honourable restraint."

"I thought of that choice to-day, mother, as I crossed the bridge and
looked at the church; and more than ever thankful did I feel that our
blessed Friedel, having aided me over that one decisive pass, was
laid to rest, his tender spirit unvexed by the shocks and divisions
that have wrenched me hither and thither."

"Nay; not hither and thither.  Ever hadst thou a resolute purpose and
aim."

"Ever failed in by my own error or that of others--What, thou
nestling here, my little Vittoria, away from all yonder prattle?"

"Dear father, if I may, I love far best to hear you and the
grandmother talk."

"Hear the child!  She alone hath your face, mother, or Friedel's
eyes!  Is it that thou wouldst be like thy noble Roman godmother, the
Marchesa di Pescara, that makes thee seek our grave company, little
one?"

"I always long to hear you talk of her, and of the Italian days, dear
father, and how you won this noble jewel of yours."

"Ah, child, that was before those times!  It was the gift of good
Kaisar Max at his godson's christening, when he filled your sweet
mother with pretty spite by persuading her that it was a little
golden bear-skin."

"Tell her how you had gained it, my son."

"By vapouring, child; and by the dull pride of my neighbours.
Heard'st thou never of the siege of Padua, when we had Bayard, the
best knight in Europe, and 500 Frenchmen for our allies?  Our
artillery had made a breach, and the Kaisar requested the French
knights to lead the storm, whereto they answered, Well and good, but
our German nobles must share the assault, and not leave them to fight
with no better backers than the hired lanzknechts.  All in reason,
quoth I, and more shame for us not to have been foremost in our
Kaisar's own cause; but what said the rest of our misproud chivalry?
They would never condescend to climb a wall on foot in company with
lanzknechts!  On horseback must their worships fight, or not at all;
and when to shame them I called myself a mountaineer, more used to
climb than to ride, and vowed that I should esteem it an honour to
follow such a knight as Bayard, were it on all fours, then cast they
my burgher blood in my teeth.  Never saw I the Kaisar so enraged; he
swore that all the common sense in the empire was in the burgher
blood, and that he would make me a knight of the noblest order in
Europe to show how he esteemed it.  And next morning he was gone!  So
ashamed was he of his own army that he rode off in the night, and
sent orders to break up the siege.  I could have torn my hair, for I
had just lashed up a few of our nobles to a better sense of honour,
and we would yet have redeemed our name!  And after all, the Chapter
of proud Flemings would never have admitted me had not the heralds
hunted up that the Sorels were gentlemen of blood and coat armour
long ago at Liege.  I am glad my father lived to see that proved,
mother.  He could not honour thee more than he did, but he would have
been sorely grieved had I been rejected.  He often thought me a
mechanical burgher, as it was."

"Not quite so, my son.  He never failed to be proud of thy deeds,
even when he did not understand them; but this, and the grandson's
birth, were the crowning joys of his life."

"Yes, those were glad triumphant years, take them all in all, ere the
Emperor sent me to act ambassador in Rome, and we left you the two
elder little girls and the boy to take care of.  My dear little
Thekla!  She had a foreboding that she might never see those children
more, yet would she have pined her heart away more surely had I left
her at home!  I never was absent a week but I found her wasted with
watching for me."

"It was those weary seven years of Italy that changed thee most, my
son."

"Apart from you, mother, and knowing you now indeed to be widowed,
and with on the one hand such contradictory commands from the Emperor
as made me sorely ashamed of myself, of my nation, and of the man
whom I loved and esteemed personally the most on earth, yet bound
there by his express command, while I saw my tender wife's health
wasting in the climate day by day!  Yet still, while most she gasped
for a breath of Swabian hills, she ever declared it would kill her
outright to send her from me.  And thus it went on till I laid her in
the stately church of her own patroness.  Then how it would have
fared with me and the helpless little ones I know not, but for thy
noble godmother, my Vittoria, the wise and ready helper of all in
trouble, the only friend thy mother had made at Rome, and who had
been able, from all her heights of learning and accomplishment, to
value my Thekla's golden soul in its simplicity.  Even then, when too
late, came one of the Kaisar's kindest letters, recalling me,--a
letter whose every word I would have paid for with a drop of my own
blood six weeks before! and which he had only failed to send because
his head was running on the plan of that gorgeous tomb where he is
not buried!  Well, at least it brought us home to you again once
more, mother, and, where you are, comfort never has been utterly
absent from me.  And then, coming from the wilful gloom of Pope Leo's
court into our Germany, streamed over by the rays of Luther's light,
it was as if a new world of hope were dawning, as if truth would no
longer be muffled, and the young would grow up to a world far better
and purer than the old had ever seen.  What trumpet-calls those were,
and how welcome was the voice of the true Catholic faith no longer
stifled!  And my dear old Kaisar, with his clear eyes, his unfettered
mind--he felt the power and truth of those theses.  He bade the
Elector of Saxony well to guard the monk Luther as a treasure.  Ah!
had he been a younger man, or had he been more firm and resolute,
able to act as well as think for himself, things might have gone
otherwise with the Church.  He could think, but could not act; and
now we have a man who acts, but WILL not think.  It may have been a
good day for our German reputation among foreign princes when Charles
V. put on the crown; but only two days in my life have been as
mournful to me as that when I stood by Kaisar Max's death-bed at
Wells, and knew that generous, loving, fitful spirit was passing away
from the earth!  Never owned I friend I loved so well as Kaisar Max!
Nor has any Emperor done so much for this our dear land."

"The young Emperor never loved thee."

"He might have treated me as one who could be useful, but he never
forgave me for shaking hands with Luther at the Diet of Worms.  I
knew it was all over with my court favour after I had joined in
escorting the Doctor out of the city.  And the next thing was that
Georg of Freundsberg and his friends proclaimed me a bigoted Papist
because I did my utmost to keep my troop out of the devil's holiday
at the sack of Rome!  It has ever been my lot to be in disgrace with
one side or the other!  Here is my daughter's marriage hindered on
the one hand, my son's promotion checked on the other, because I have
a conscience of my own, and not of other people's!  Heaven knows the
right is no easy matter to find; but, when one thinks one sees it,
there is nothing to be done but to guide oneself by it, even if the
rest of the world will not view it in the same light."

"Nothing else!  I doubt me whether it be ever easy to see the
veritably right course while still struggling in the midst.  That is
for after ages, which behold things afar off; but each man must needs
follow his own principle in an honest and good heart, and assuredly
God will guide him to work out some good end, or hinder some evil
one."

"Ay, mother.  Each party may guard one side or other of the truth in
all honesty and faithfulness; he who cannot with his whole heart cast
in his lot with either,--he is apt to serve no purpose, and to be
scorned."

"Nay, Ebbo, may he not be a witness to the higher and more perfect
truth than either party have conceived?  Nor is inaction always
needful.  That which is right towards either side still reveals
itself at the due moment, whether it be to act or to hold still.  And
verily, Ebbo, what thou didst say even now has set me on a strange
thought of mine own dream, that which heralded the birth of thyself
and thy brother.  As thou knowest, it seemed to me that I was
watching two sparkles from the extinguished Needfire wheel.  One rose
aloft and shone as a star!"

"My guiding-star!"

"The other fulfilled those words of the Wise Man.  It shone and ran
to and fro in the grass.  And surely, my Ebbo, thy mother may feel
that, in all these dark days of perplexity and trial, the spark of
light hath ever shone and drawn its trail of brightness in the gloom,
even though the way was long, and seemed uncertain."

"The mother who ever fondled me WILL think so, it may be!  But, ah!
she had better pray that the light be clearer, and that I may not
fall utterly short of the star!"


Travellers in Wurtemburg may perhaps turn aside from glorious old
Ulm, and the memories of the battlefields around it, to the romantic
country round the Swabian mountains, through which descend the
tributaries of the Danube.  Here they may think themselves fortunate
if they come upon a green valley, with a bright mountain torrent
dashing through it, fresh from the lofty mountain, with terraced
sides that rise sheer above.  An old bridge, a mill, and a neat
German village lie clustered in the valley; a seignorial mansion
peeps out of the forest glades; and a lovely church, of rather late
Gothic, but beautifully designed, attracts the eye so soon as it can
be persuaded to quit the romantic outline of the ruined baronial
castle high up on one of the mountain ledges.  Report declares that
there are tombs in the church well worth inspection.  You seek out an
old venerable blue-coated peasant who has charge of the church.

"What is yonder castle?"

"It is the castle of Adlerstein."

"Are the family still extant?"

"Yea, yea; they built yonder house when the Schloss became ruinous.
They have always been here."

The church is very beautiful in its details, the carved work of the
east end and pulpit especially so, but nothing is so attractive as
the altar tomb in the chantry chapel.  It is a double one, holding
not, as usual, the recumbent effigies of a husband and wife, but of
two knights in armour.

"Who are these, good friend?"

"They are the good Barons Ebbo and Friedel."

Father and son they appear to be, killed at the same time in some
fatal battle, for the white marble face of one is round with youth,
no hair on lip nor chin, and with a lovely peaceful solemnity, almost
cheerfulness, in the expression.  The other, a bearded man, has the
glory of old age in his worn features, beautiful and restful, but it
is as if one had gone to sleep in the light of dawn, the other in the
last glow of sunset.  Their armour and their crests are alike, but
the young one bears the eagle shield alone, while the elder has the
same bearing repeated upon an escutcheon of pretence; the young man's
hands are clasped over a harp, those of the other over a Bible, and
the elder wears the insignia of the order of the Golden Fleece.  They
are surely father and son, a maiden knight and tried warrior who fell
together?

"No," the guide shakes his head; "they are twin brothers, the good
Barons Ebbo and Friedel, who were born when their father had been
taken captive by the Saracens while on a crusade.  Baron Friedel was
slain by the Turks at the bridge foot, and his brother built the
church in his memory.  He first planted vines upon the mountains, and
freed the peasants from the lord's dues on their flax.  And it is
true that the two brothers may still be seen hovering on the
mountain-side in the mist at sunset, sometimes one, sometimes both."

You turn with a smile to the inscription, sure that those windows,
those porches, that armour, never were of crusading date, and ready
to refute the old peasant.  You spell out the upright Gothic letters
around the cornice of the tomb, and you read, in mediaeval Latin,


"Orate pro Anima Friedmundis Equitis Baronis Adlersteini.  A. D.
mccccxciii"


Then turn to the other side and read -


"Hic jacet Eberardus Eques Baro Adlersteini.  A.D. mdxliii.  Demum"


Yes, the guide is right.  They are brothers, with well-nigh a
lifetime between their deaths.  Is that the meaning of that strange
Demum?

Few of the other tombs are worth attention, each lapsing further into
the bad taste of later ages; yet there is one still deserving
admiration, placed close to the head of that of the two Barons.  It
is the effigy of a lady, aged and serene, with a delicately-carved
face beneath her stiff head-gear.  Surely this monument was erected
somewhat later, for the inscription is in German.  Stiff, contracted,
hard to read, but this is the rendering of it


"Here lies Christina Sorel, wife of Eberhard, xxth Baron von
Adlerstein, and mother of the Barons Eberhard and Friedmund.  She
fell asleep two days before her son, on the feast of St. John,
mdxliii.

"Her children shall rise up and call her blessed.

"Erected with full hearts by her grandson, Baron Friedmund
Maximilianus, and his brothers and sisters.  Farewell."





[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



Widger's Quotations of Charles D. Warner

by David Widger




FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITIONS
OF THE WORKS OF CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER


CONTENTS:

Quotations are from the following Project Gutenberg Etexts:

Entire Gutenberg Warner Files, by C.Warner [CW#40][cwewk10.txt]3136
Summer in a Garden, by C. D. Warner        [CW#39][cwsig10.txt]3135
Backlog Studies, by Charles Dudley Warner  [CW#38][cwbls10.txt]3134
Baddeck, by Charles Dudley Warner          [CW#37][cwbdk10.txt]3133
In the Wilderness, by C. D. Warner         [CW#36][cwitw10.txt]3132
Spring in New England, by C. D. Warner     [CW#35][cwsne10.txt]3131
Captain John Smith, by C. D. Warner        [CW#34][cwcjs10.txt]3130
Pocahantas, by Charles Dudley Warner       [CW#33][cwpoc10.txt]3129
Saunterings, by Charles Dudley Warner      [CW#32][cwsnt10.txt]3128
Being a Boy, by Charles Dudley Warner      [CW#31][cwbab10.txt]3127
On Horseback, by Charles Dudley Warner     [CW#30][cwohb10.txt]3126
Complete Essays, by Charles Dudley Warner  [CW#29][cwces10.txt]3125
For whom Shakespeare, by C. D. Warner      [CW#28][cwshk10.txt]3124
Novel and School, by Charles Dudley Warner [CW#27][cwnsc10.txt]3123
England, by Charles Dudley Warner          [CW#26][cweng10.txt]3122
Mr. Froude's Progress, by C. D. Warner     [CW#25][cwfpg10.txt]3121
Modern Fiction, by C. D. Warner            [CW#24][cwmft10.txt]3120
Your Culture to Me, by C. D. Warner        [CW#23][cwctm10.txt]3119
Equality, by Charles Dudley Warner         [CW#22][cweql10.txt]3118
Literature and Life, by C. D. Warner       [CW#21][cwlal10.txt]3117
Nine Short Essays, by Charles D. Warner    [CW#12][cw9es10.txt]3108
Literary Copyright, by C. D. Warner        [CW#20][cwlcr10.txt]3116
Indeterminate Sentence, by C. D. Warner    [CW#19][cwins10.txt]3115
Education of the Negro, by C. D. Warner    [CW#18][cwneg10.txt]3114
Causes of Discontent, by C. D. Warner      [CW#17][cwcdc10.txt]3113
Pilgrim and American, by C. D. Warner      [CW#16][cwpam10.txt]3112
Diversities of American Life, by C. Warner [CW#15][cwdal10.txt]3111
American Newspaper, by C. D. Warner        [CW#14][cwanp10.txt]3110
Fashions in Literature, by C. D. Warner    [CW#13][cwflt10.txt]3109
Nine Short Essays, by Charles D. Warner    [CW#12][cw9es10.txt]3108
      CONTENTS:
          Night in Tuilleries
          Truthfulness
          Pursuit of Happiness
          Literature and the Stage
          Life Prolonging Art
          H.H. in S. California
          Simplicity
          English Volunteers
          Nathan Hale
As We Go, by Charles Dudley Warner         [CW#11][cwawg10.txt]3107
As We Were Saying, by C. D. Warner         [CW#10][cwaws10.txt]3106
That Fortune, by Charles Dudley Warner      [CW#9][cwfrt10.txt]3105
The Golden House, by Charles Dudley Warner  [CW#8][cwgld10.txt]3104
Little Journey in the World, by C. Warner   [CW#7][cwljw10.txt]3103
Their Pilgrimage, by Charles Dudley Warner  [CW#6][cwpil10.txt]3102
Washington Irving, by Charles Dudley Warner [CW#5][cwirv10.txt]3101




EDITOR'S NOTE

Readers well acquainted with the works of Charles Dudley Warner
may wish to see if their favorite passages are listed in this
selection.  The etext editor will be glad to add your suggestions.
One of the advantages of internet over paper publication is the ease
of quick revision.

All the titles  may be found using the Project Gutenberg search engine.
After downloading a specific file, the location and complete context of
the quotations  may be found by inserting a small part of the quotation
into the 'Find' or 'Search' functions of the user's word processing
program.

The quotations are in two formats:
     1. Small passages from the text.
     2. An alphabetized list of one-liners.

The editor may be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net> for comments,
questions or suggested additions to these extracts.

D.W.





              WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS of CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER



WASHINGTON IRVING
[CW#5][cwirv10.txt]3101

"Some persons, in looking upon life, view it as they would view a
picture, with a stern and criticising eye.  He also looks upon life as a
picture, but to catch its beauties, its lights,--not its defects and
shadows.  On the former he loves to dwell.  He has a wonderful knack at
shutting his eyes to the sinister side of anything.  Never beat a more
kindly heart than his; alive to the sorrows, but not to the faults, of
his friends, but doubly alive to their virtues and goodness.  Indeed,
people seemed to grow more good with one so unselfish and so gentle."
--Emily Foster.

....authors are particularly candid in admitting the faults of their
friends.

The governor, from the stern of his schooner, gave a short but truly
patriarchal address to his citizens, wherein he recommended them to
comport like loyal and peaceable subjects,--to go to church regularly on
Sundays, and to mind their business all the week besides.  That the women
should be dutiful and affectionate to their husbands,--looking after
nobody's concerns but their own,--eschewing all gossipings and morning
gaddings,--and carrying short tongues and long petticoats.  That the men
should abstain from intermeddling in public concerns, intrusting the
cares of government to the officers appointed to support them, staying at
home, like good citizens, making money for themselves, and getting
children for the benefit of their country.

It happens to the princes of literature to encounter periods of varying
duration when their names are revered and their books are not read.  The
growth, not to say the fluctuation, of Shakespeare's popularity is one of
the curiosities of literary history.  Worshiped by his contemporaries,
apostrophized by Milton only fourteen pears after his death as the "dear
son of memory, great heir to fame,"--"So sepulchred in such pomp dost
lie, That kings, for such a tomb, would wish to die,"--he was neglected
by the succeeding age, the subject of violent extremes of opinion in the
eighteenth century, and so lightly esteemed by some that Hume could doubt
if he were a poet "capable of furnishing a proper entertainment to a
refined and intelligent audience," and attribute to the rudeness of his
"disproportioned and misshapen" genius the "reproach of barbarism" which
the English nation had suffered from all its neighbors.

I have lost confidence in the favorable disposition of my countrymen, and
look forward to cold scrutiny and stern criticism, and this is a line of
writing in which I have not hitherto ascertained my own powers.  Could I
afford it, I should like to write, and to lay my writings aside when
finished.  There is an independent delight in study and in the creative
exercise of the pen; we live in a world of dreams, but publication lets
in the noisy rabble of the world, and there is an end of our dreaming.




THEIR PILGRIMAGE
[CW#6][cwpil10.txt]3102

Act of eating is apt to be disenchanting
Air of endurance that fathers of families put on
Anxiously asked at every turn how he likes it
As much by what they did not say as by what they did say
Asked Mr King if this was his first visit
Beautifully regular and more satisfactorily monotonous
Best part of a conversation is the things not said
Comfort of leaving same things to the imagination
Common attitude of the wholesale to the retail dealer
Confident opinions about everything
Couldn't stand this sort of thing much longer
Designed by a carpenter, and executed by a stone-mason
Facetious humor that is more dangerous than grumbling
Fat men/women were never intended for this sort of exhibition
Feeding together in a large room must be a little humiliating
Fish, they seemed to say, are not so easily caught as men
Florid man, who "swelled" in, patronizing the entire room
Hated a fellow that was always in high spirits
Irresponsibility of hotel life
It is a kind of information I have learned to dispense with
It's an occupation for a man to keep up a cottage
Let me be unhappy now and then, and not say anything about it
Live, in short, rather more for one's self than for society
Loftily condescending
Lunch was dinner and that dinner was supper
Man in love is poor company for himself and for everybody else
Nearsighted, you know, about seeing people that are not
Not to care about anything you do care about
Notion of duty has to account for much of the misery in life
People who haven't so many corners as our people have
People who leave home on purpose to grumble
Pet dogs of all degrees of ugliness
Satisfy the average taste without the least aid from art
Seemed only a poor imitation of pleasure
Shrinking little man, whose whole appearance was an apology
Small frame houses hopelessly decorated with scroll-work
So many swearing colors
Thinking of themselves and the effect they are producing
Vanishing shades of an attractive and consolable grief
Women are cruelest when they set out to be kind
Wore their visible exclusiveness like a garment
Young ones who know what is best for the elders




 LITTLE JOURNEY IN THE WORLD
[CW#7][cwljw10.txt]3103

Absurd to be so interested in fictitious trouble
And in this way I crawled out of the discussion, as usual
Anything can be borne if he knows that he shall see her tomorrow
Clubs and circles
Democracy is intolerant of variations from the general level
Do you think so?
Eagerness to acquire the money of other people, not to make it
Easier to be charitable than to be just
Everybody has read it
Great deal of mind, it takes him so long to make it up
How much good do you suppose condescending charity does?
In youth, as at the opera, everything seems possible
It is so easy to turn life into a comedy!
It is so painful to shrink, and so delightful to grow!
Knew how roughly life handles all youthful enthusiasms
Liberty to indulge in republican simplicity
Much easier to forgive a failure than a success
Not the use of money, but of the use money makes of you
One thing to entertain and another to be entertaining
Possessory act of readjusting my necktie
Process which is called weighing a thing in the mind
Simple enjoyment being considered an unworthy motive
Society that exists mainly to pay its debts gets stupid
Talk is always tame if no one dares anything
Tastes and culture were of the past age
Unhappy are they whose desires are all ratified
World has become so tolerant that it doesn't care




THE GOLDEN HOUSE
[CW#8][cwgld10.txt]3104

Absolutely necessary that the world should be amused
Affectation of familiarity
Air of determined enjoyment
Always did what he said he would do
Desire to do something rather than the desire to make something
Don't know what it's all for--I doubt if there is much in it
Easier to make art fashionable than to make fashion artistic
Emanation of aggressive prosperity
Everybody is superficially educated
Grateful for her forbearance of verbal expression
Happy l