essness and indolence are always blameable
Little minds mistake little objects for great ones
Little failings and weaknesses
Loud laughter is the mirth of the mob
Love with him, who they think is the most in love with them
Loved without being despised, and feared without being hated
Low company, most falsely and impudently, call pleasure
Low buffoonery, or silly accidents, that always excite laughter
Luther's disappointed avarice
Machiavel
Made him believe that the world was made for him
Make a great difference between companions and friends
Make himself whatever he pleases, except a good poet
Make yourself necessary
Make every man I met with like me, and every woman love me
Man is dishonored by not resenting an affront
Man or woman cannot resist an engaging exterior
Man of sense may be in haste, but can never be in a hurry
Man who is only good on holydays is good for very little
Mangles what he means to carve
Manner is full as important as the matter
Manner of doing things is often more important
Manners must adorn knowledge
Many things which seem extremely probable are not true
Many are very willing, and very few able
Mastery of one's temper
May you live as long as you are fit to live, but no longer!
May you rather die before you cease to be fit to live
May not forget with ease what you have with difficulty learned
Mazarin and Lewis the Fourteenth riveted the shackles
Meditation and reflection
Mere reason and good sense is never to be talked to a mob
Merit and good_breeding will make their way everywhere
Method
Mistimes or misplaces everything
Mitigating, engaging words do by no means weaken your argument
MOB: Understanding they have collectively none
Moderation with your enemies
Modesty is the only sure bait when you angle for praise
Money, the cause of much mischief
More people have ears to be tickled, than understandings to judge
More one sees, the less one either wonders or admires
More you know, the modester you should be
More one works, the more willing one is to work
Mortifying inferiority in knowledge, rank, fortune
Most people enjoy the inferiority of their best friends
Most long talkers single out some one unfortunate man in company
Most ignorant are, as usual, the boldest conjecturers
Most people have ears, but few have judgment; tickle those ears
Much sooner forgive an injustice than an insult
My own health varies, as usual, but never deviates into good
Mystical nonsense
Name that we leave behind at one place often gets before us
National honor and interest have been sacrificed to private
Necessity of scrupulously preserving the appearances
Neglect them in little things, they will leave you in great
Negligence of it implies an indifference about pleasing
Neither know nor care, (when I die) for I am very weary
Neither abilities or words enough to call a coach
Neither retail nor receive scandal willingly
Never would know anything that he had not a mind to know
Never read history without having maps
Never affect the character in which you have a mind to shine
Never implicitly adopt a character upon common fame
Never seek for wit; if it presents itself, well and good
Never to speak of yourself at all
Never slattern away one minute in idleness
Never quit a subject till you are thoroughly master of it
Never maintain an argument with heat and clamor
Never seem wiser, nor more learned, than the people you are with
Never saw a froward child mended by whipping
Never to trust implicitly to the informations of others
Nipped in the bud
No great regard for human testimony
No man is distrait with the man he fears, or the woman he loves
No one feels pleasure, who does not at the same time give it
Not tumble, but slide gently to the bottom of the hill of life
Not to communicate, prematurely, one's hopes or one's fears
Not only pure, but, like Caesar's wife, unsuspected
Not make their want still worse by grieving and regretting them
Not making use of any one capital letter
Not to admire anything too much
Not one minute of the day in which you do nothing at all
Notes by which dances are now pricked down as well as tunes
Nothing in courts is exactly as it appears to be
Nothing much worth either desiring or fearing
Nothing so precious as time, and so irrecoverable when lost
Observe, without being thought an observer
Often more necessary to conceal contempt than resentment
Often necessary, not to manifest all one feels
Often necessary to seem ignorant of what one knows
Oftener led by their hearts than by their understandings
Old fellow ought to seem wise whether he really be so or not
One must often yield, in order to prevail
Only doing one thing at a time
Only because she will not, and not because she cannot
Only solid and lasting peace, between a man and his wife
Our understandings are generally the DUPES of our hearts
Our frivolous dissertations upon the weather, or upon whist
Out of livery; which makes them both impertinent and useless
Outward air of modesty to all he does
Overvalue what we do not know
Oysters, are only in season in the R months
Passes for a wit, though he hath certainly no uncommon share
Patience is the only way not to make bad worse
Patient toleration of certain airs of superiority
Pay your own reckoning, but do not treat the whole company
Pay them with compliments, but not with confidence
People never desire all till they have gotten a great deal
People lose a great deal of time by reading
People will repay, and with interest too, inattention
People angling for praise
People hate those who make them feel their own inferiority
Perfection of everything that is worth doing at all
Perseverance has surprising effects
Person to you whom I am very indifferent about, I mean myself
Pettish, pouting conduct is a great deal too young
Petty jury
Plain notions of right and wrong
Planted while young, that degree of knowledge now my refuge
Please all who are worth pleasing; offend none
Pleased to some degree by showing a desire to please
Pleased with him, by making them first pleased with themselves
Pleasing in company is the only way of being pleased in yourself
Pleasure and business with equal inattention
Pleasure is necessarily reciprocal
Pleasure is the rock which most young people split upon
Pleasures do not commonly last so long as life
Pocket all your knowledge with your watch
Polite, but without the troublesome forms and stiffness
POLITICIANS NEITHER LOVE NOR HATE
Prefer useful to frivolous conversations
Prejudices are our mistresses
Pride remembers it forever
Pride of being the first of the company
Prudent reserve
Public speaking
Put out your time, but to good interest
Quarrel with them when they are grown up, for being spoiled
Quietly cherished error, instead of seeking for truth
Read my eyes out every day, that I may not hang myself
Read with caution and distrust
Real merit of any kind will be discovered
Real friendship is a slow grower
Reason ought to direct the whole, but seldom does
Reason, which always ought to direct mankind, seldom does
Receive them with great civility, but with great incredulity
Reciprocally profess wishes which they seldom form
Recommend (pleasure) to you, like an Epicurean
Recommends self_conversation to all authors
Refuge of people who have neither wit nor invention of their own
Refuse more gracefully than other people could grant
Repeating
Represent, but do not pronounce
Reserve with your friends
Respect without timidity
Respectful without meanness, easy without too much familiarity
Return you the ball 'a la volee'
Rich man never borrows
Richelieu came and shackled the nation
Rochefoucault, who, I am afraid, paints man very exactly
Rochefoucault
Rough corners which mere nature has given to the smoothest
Ruined their own son by what they called loving him
Same coolness and unconcern in any and every company
Scandal: receiver is always thought, as bad as the thief
Scarce any flattery is too gross for them to swallow
Scarcely any body who is absolutely good for nothing
Scrupled no means to obtain his ends
Secret, without being dark and mysterious
Secrets
See what you see, and to hear what you hear
Seem to like and approve of everything at first
Seeming frankness with a real reserve
Seeming inattention to the person who is speaking to you
Seeming openness is prudent
Seems to have no opinion of his own
Seldom a misfortune to be childless
Self_love draws a thick veil between us and our faults
Sentiment_mongers
Sentiments that were never felt, pompously described
Serious without being dull
Settled here for good, as it is called
Shakespeare
She has all the reading that a woman should have
She who conquers only catches a Tartar
She has uncommon, sense and knowledge for a woman
Shepherds and ministers are both men
Silence in love betrays more woe
Singularity is only pardonable in old age
Six, or at most seven hours sleep
Smile, where you cannot strike
Some complaisance and attention to fools is prudent
Some men pass their whole time in doing nothing
Something or other is to be got out of everybody
Something must be said, but that something must be nothing
Sooner forgive an injury than an insult
Sow jealousies among one's enemies
Spare the persons while you lash the crimes
Speaking to himself in the glass
Stamp_act has proved a most pernicious measure
Stamp_duty, which our Colonists absolutely refuse to pay
State your difficulties, whenever you have any
Steady assurance, with seeming modesty
Studied and elaborate dress of the ugliest women in the world
Style is the dress of thoughts
Success turns much more upon manner than matter
Sure guide is, he who has often gone the road which you want to
Suspicion of age, no woman, let her be ever so old, ever forgive
Swearing
Tacitus
Take the hue of the company you are with
Take characters, as they do most things, upon trust
Take, rather than give, the tone of the company you are in
Take nothing for granted, upon the bare authority of the author
Taking up adventitious, proves their want of intrinsic merit
Talent of hating with good_breeding and loving with prudence
Talk often, but never long
Talk sillily upon a subject of other people's
Talk of natural affection is talking nonsense
Talking of either your own or other people's domestic affairs
Tell me whom you live with, and I will tell you who you are
Tell stories very seldom
The longest life is too short for knowledge
The present moments are the only ones we are sure of
The best have something bad, and something little
The worst have something good, and sometimes something great
There are many avenues to every man
They thought I informed, because I pleased them
Thin veil of Modesty drawn before Vanity
Think to atone by zeal for their want of merit and importance
Think yourself less well than you are, in order to be quite so
Thinks himself much worse than he is
Thoroughly, not superficially
Those who remarkably affect any one virtue
Those whom you can make like themselves better
Three passions that often put honesty to most severe trials
Timidity and diffidence
To be heard with success, you must be heard with pleasure
To be pleased one must please
To govern mankind, one must not overrate them
To seem to have forgotten what one remembers
To know people's real sentiments, I trust much more to my eyes
To great caution, you can join seeming frankness and openness
Too like, and too exact a picture of human nature
Trifle only with triflers; and be serious only with the serious
Trifles that concern you are not trifles to me
Trifling parts, with their little jargon
Trite jokes and loud laughter reduce him to a buffoon
Truth, but not the whole truth, must be the invariable principle
Truth leaves no room for compliments
Unaffected silence upon that subject is the only true medium
Unguarded frankness
Unintelligible to his readers, and sometimes to himself
Unopened, because one title in twenty has been omitted
Unwilling and forced; it will never please
Use palliatives when you contradict
Useful sometimes to see the things which one ought to avoid
Value of moments, when cast up, is immense
Vanity, interest, and absurdity, always display
Vanity, that source of many of our follies
Warm and young thanks, not old and cold ones
Water_drinkers can write nothing good
We love to be pleased better than to be informed
We have many of those useful prejudices in this country
We shall be feared, if we do not show that we fear
Well dressed, not finely dressed
What pleases you in others, will in general please them in you
What displeases or pleases you in others
What you feel pleases you in them
What have I done to_day?
What is impossible, and what is only difficult
Whatever pleases you most in others
Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well
Whatever one must do, one should do 'de bonne grace'
Whatever real merit you have, other people will discover
When well dressed for the day think no more of it afterward
Where one would gain people, remember that nothing is little
Who takes warning by the fate of others?
Wife, very often heard indeed, but seldom minded
Will not so much as hint at our follies
Will pay very dear for the quarrels and ambition of a few
Wish you, my dear friend, as many happy new years as you deserve
Wit may created any admirers but makes few friends
Witty without satire or commonplace
Woman like her, who has always pleased, and often been pleased
Women are the only refiners of the merit of men
Women choose their favorites more by the ear
Women are all so far Machiavelians
Words are the dress of thoughts
World is taken by the outside of things
Would not tell what she did not know
Wrapped up and absorbed in their abstruse speculations
Writing anything that may deserve to be read
Writing what may deserve to be read
Wrongs are often forgiven; but contempt never is
Yielded commonly without conviction
You must be respectable, if you will be respected
You had much better hold your tongue than them
Young people are very apt to overrate both men and things
Young fellow ought to be wiser than he should seem to be
Young men are as apt to think themselves wise enough
Your merit and your manners can alone raise you
Your character there, whatever it is, will get before you here










This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS 

FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITIONS
OF THE WORKS OF MARK TWAIN




TITLES AND CONTENTS OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG TWAIN COLLECTION


The Innocents Abroad
Mark Twain's (Burlesque) Auto-biography
     First Romance.
Roughing it
The Gilded Age (With Charles Dudley Warner)
Sketches New and Old
     My Watch
     Political Economy
     The Jumping Frog
     Journalism in Tennessee
     The Story of the Bad Little Boy
     The Story of the Good Little Boy
     A Couple of Poems by Twain and Moore
     Niagara
     Answers to Correspondents
     To Raise Poultry
     Experience of the Mcwilliamses with Membranous Croup
     My First Literary Venture
     How the Author Was Sold in Newark
     The Office Bore
     Johnny Greer
     The Facts in the Case of the Great Beef Contract
     The Case of George Fisher
     Disgraceful Persecution of a Boy
     The Judges "Spirited Woman"
     Information Wanted
     Some Learned Fables, for Good Old Boys and Girls
     My Late Senatorial Secretaryship
     A Fashion Item
     Riley-newspaper Correspondent
     A Fine Old Man
     Science vs. Luck
     The Late Benjamin Franklin
     Mr. Bloke's Item
     A Medieval Romance
     Petition Concerning Copyright
     After-dinner Speech
     Lionizing Murderers
     A New Crime
     A Curious Dream
     A True Story
     The Siamese Twins
     Speech at the Scottish Banquet in London
     A Ghost Story
     The Capitoline Venus
     Speech on Accident Insurance
     John Chinaman in New York
     How I Edited an Agricultural Paper
     The Petrified Man
     My Bloody Massacre
     The Undertaker's Chat
     Concerning Chambermaids
     Aurelia's Unfortunate Young Man
     "After" Jenkins
     About Barbers
     "Party Cries" in Ireland
     The Facts Concerning The Recant Resignation
     History Repeats Itself
     Honored as a Curiosity
     First Interview Kith Artemus Ward
     Cannibalism in The Cars
     The Killing of Julius Caesar "Localized"
     The Widow's Protest
     The Scriptural Panoramist
     Curing a Cold
     A Curious Pleasure Excursion
     Running for Governor
     A Mysterious Visit
The Curious Republic of Gondour and Other Whimsical Sketches
     The Curious Republic of Gondour
     A Memory
     Introductory to "Memoranda".
     About Smells
     A Couple of Sad Experiences
     Dan Murphy
     The "Tournament" in A.d. 1870
     Curious Relic for Sale
     A Reminiscence of The Back Settlements
     A Royal Compliment
     The Approaching Epidemic
     The Tone-imparting Committee
     Our Precious Lunatic
     The European War
     The Wild Man Interviewed
     Last Words of Great Men
The Facts Concerning The Recent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut
Mark Twain's [Date, 1601]
     Conversation as it Was by The Fireside in The Time of The Tudors
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
The Loves of Alonzo Fitz Clarence and Rosannah EThelton and Other Stories
     The Loves of Alonzo Fitz Clarence and Rosannah Ethelton
     On The Decay of The Art of Lying
     About Magnanimous-incident Literature
          The Grateful Poodle
          The Benevolent Author
          The Grateful Husband
     Punch, Brothers, Punch
     The Great Revolution in Pitcairn
     The Canvasser's Tale
     An Encounter with an Interviewer
     Paris Notes
     Legend of Sagenfeld, in Germany
     Speech on The Babies
     Speech on The Weather
     Concerning The American Language
     Rogers
Some Rambling Notes of an Idle Excursion
The Stolen White Elephant
A Tramp Abroad
The Prince and The Pauper
Life on The Mississippi
The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court
The American Claimant
Extracts from Adam's Diary
In Defence of Harriet Shelley
Fenimore Cooper's Literary Offences
Essays on Paul Bourget
     What Paul Bourget Thinks of Us
     A Little Note to M. Paul Bourget
Tom Sawyer Abroad
The Tragedy of Pudd'nhead Wilson
Those Extraordinary Twins
Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc
Tom Sawyer, Detective
Following The Equator, a Journey Around The World
The Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg
The Hadleyberg Other Stories
     My First Lie, and How I Got out of it
     The Esquimaux Maiden's Romance
     Christian Science and The Book of Mrs. Eddy
     Is He Living or Is He Dead?
     My Debut as a Literary Person
     At The Appetite-cure
     Concerning The Jews
     From The 'London Times' of 1904
     About Play-acting
     Travelling with a Reformer
     Diplomatic Pay and Clothes
     Luck
     The Captain's Story
     Stirring Times in Austria
     Meisterschaft
     My Boyhood Dreams
          To The above Old People
     In Memoriam--Olivia Susan Clemens
What Is Man and Other Essays
     What Is Man?
     The Death of Jean
     The Turning-point of My Life
     How to Make History Dates Stick
     The Memorable Assassination
     A Scrap of Curious History
     Switzerland, The Cradle of Liberty
     At The Shrine of St. Wagner
     William Dean Howells
     English as She Is Taught
     A Simplified Alphabet
     As Concerns Interpreting The Deity
     Concerning Tobacco
     Taming The Bicycle
     Is Shakespeare Dead?
The Mysterious Stranger and Other Stories
     The Mysterious Stranger
     A Fable
     Hunting The Deceitful Turkey
     The Mcwilliamses and The Burglar Alarm
A Double Barreled Detective
A Dog's Tale
The $30,000 Bequest and Other Stories
      The $30,000 Bequest
      A Dog's Tale
      Was it Heaven?  Or Hell?
      A Cure for The Blues
      The Enemy Conquered; Or, Love Triumphant
      The Californian's Tale
      A Helpless Situation
      A Telephonic Conversation
      Edward Mills and George Benton: A Tale
      The Five Boons of Life
      The First Writing-machines
      Italian Without a Master
      Italian with Grammar
      a Burlesque Biography
      How to Tell a Story
      General Washington's Negro Body-servant
      Wit Inspirations of The "Two-year-olds"
      An Entertaining Article
      a Letter to The Secretary of The Treasury
      Amended Obituaries
      A Monument to Adam
      A Humane Word from Satan
      Introduction to "The New Guide of The
      Conversation in Portuguese and English"
      Advice to Little Girls
      Post-mortem Poetry
      The Danger of Lying in Bed
      Portrait of King William Iii
      Does The Race of Man Love a Lord?
      Extracts from Adam's Diary
      Eve's Diary
A Horse's Tale
Christian Science
Extract from Captain Stormfield's Visit to Heaven
Is Shakespeare Dead?
On The Decay of The Art of Lying
Goldsmith's Friend Abroad Again
How to Tell a Story and Other Stories
     How to Tell a Story
          The Wounded Soldier
          The Golden Arm
     Mental Telegraphy Again
     The Invalids Story
Mark Twain's Speeches
     Introduction
     Preface
     The Story of a Speech
     Plymouth Rock and The Pilgrims
     Compliments and Degrees
     Books, Authors, and Hats
     Dedication Speech
     Die Schrecken Der Deutschen Sprache.
     The Horrors of The German Language
     German for The Hungarians
     A New German Word
     Unconscious Plagiarism
     The Weather
     The Babies
     Our Children and Great Discoveries
     Educating Theatre-goers
     The Educational Theatre
     Poets as Policemen
     Pudd'nhead Wilson Dramatized
     Daly Theatre
     The Dress of Civilized Woman
     Dress Reform and Copyright
     College Girls
     Girls
     The Ladies
     Woman's Press Club
     Votes for Women
     Woman-an Opinion
     Advice to Girls
     Taxes and Morals
     Tammany and Croker
     Municipal Corruption
     Municipal Government
     China and The Philippines
     Theoretical and Practical Morals
     Layman's Sermon
     University Settlement Society
     Public Education Association
     Education and Citizenship
     Courage
     The Dinner to Mr. Choate
     On Stanley and Livingstone
     Henry M. Stanley
     Dinner to Mr. Jerome
     Henry Irving
     Dinner to Hamilton W. Mabie
     Introducing Nye and Riley
     Dinner to Whitelaw Reid
     Rogers and Railroads
     The Old-fashioned Printer
     Society of American Authors
     Reading-room Opening
     Literature
     Disappearance of Literature
     The New York Press Club Dinner
     The Alphabet and Simplified Spelling
     Spelling and Pictures
     Books and Burglars
     Authors' Club
     Booksellers
     "Mark Twain's First Appearance"
     Morals and Memory
     Queen Victoria
     Joan of Arc
     Accident Insurance--etc.
     Osteopathy
     Water-supply
     Mistaken Identity
     Cats and Candy
     Obituary Poetry
     Cigars and Tobacco
     Billiards
     The Union Right or Wrong?
     An Ideal French Address
     Statistics
     Galveston Orphan Bazaar
     San Francisco Earthquake
     Charity and Actors
     Russian Republic
     Russian Sufferers
     Watterson and Twain as Rebels
     Robert Fulton Fund
     Fulton Day, Jamestown
     Lotos Club Dinner in Honor of Mark Twain
     Copyright
     In Aid of The Blind
     Dr. Mark Twain, Farmeopath
     Missouri University Speech
     Business
     Carnegie The Benefactor
     On Poetry, Veracity, and Suicide
     Welcome Home
     An Undelivered Speech
     Sixty-seventh Birthday
     To The Whitefriars
     The Ascot Gold Cup
     The Savage Club Dinner
     General Miles and The Dog
     When in Doubt, Tell The Truth
     The Day We Celebrate
     Independence Day
     Americans and The English
     About London
     Princeton
     The St. Louis Harbor-boat "Mark Twain"
     Seventieth Birthday
Mark Twain's Letters 1853-1910
     Arranged with Comment by Albert Bigelow Paine
Mark Twain, a Biography, by Albert Bigelow Paine




SELECTED QUOTATIONS OF MARK TWAIN

by David Widger




Project Gutenberg has now posted over sixty of the works of Mark Twain.
It is hoped that this compilation of the editor's favorite quotations
will be of interest and use.  All the titles may be found using the
Project  Gutenberg  search engine.  After downloading a specific file,
the location and complete context of the quotations  may be found by
inserting a small part of the quotation into the 'Find' or 'Search'
funtions of the user's word processing program.

The quotations are in two formats:
      1. Small paragraphs from the text.
      2. An alphabetized list of one-liners.

The editor would be pleased to be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net>
for comments, questions and criticism.

D.W.




FOLLOWING THE EQUATOR, by Mark Twain [feqtr10.txt]  2895

Against nature to take an interest in familiar things
Age after age, the barren and meaningless process
All life seems to be sacred except human life
But there are liars everywhere this year
Capacity must be shown (in other work); in the law, concealment will do
Christmas brings harassment and dread to many excellent people
Climate which nothing can stand except rocks
Creature which was everything in general and nothing in particular
Custom supersedes all other forms of law
Death in life; death without its privileges
Every one is a moon, and has a dark side
Exercise, for such as like that kind of work
Explain the inexplicable
Faith is believing what you know ain't so
Forbids betting on a sure thing
Forgotten fact is news when it comes again
Get your formalities right--never mind about the moralities
Give thanks that Christmas comes but once a year
Good protections against temptations; but the surest is cowardice
Goody-goody puerilities and dreary moralities
Habit of assimilating incredibilities
Human pride is not worth while
Hunger is the handmaid of genius
If the man doesn't believe as we do, we say he is a crank
Inherited prejudices in favor of hoary ignorances
It is easier to stay out than get out
Man is the only animal that blushes--or needs to
Meddling philanthropists
Melt a brass door-knob and weather which will only make it mushy
Moral sense, and there is an Immoral Sense
Most satisfactory pet--never coming when he is called
Natural desire to have more of a good thing than he needs
Neglected her habits, and hadn't any
Never could tell a lie that anybody would doubt
No nation occupies a foot of land that was not stolen
No people who are quite so vulgar as the over-refined ones
Notion that he is less savage than the other savages
Only way to keep your health is to eat what you don't want
Ostentatious of his modesty
Otherwise they would have thought I was afraid, which I was
Pity is for the living, Envy is for the dead
Prosperity is the best protector of principle
Received with a large silence that suggested doubt
Seventy is old enough--after that, there is too much risk
Silent lie and a spoken one
Sinking vessel, with no freight in her to throw over
Takes your enemy and your friend, working together, to hurt you
Thankfulness is not so general
The man with a new idea is a Crank until the idea succeeds
This is a poor old ship, and ought to be insured and sunk
To a delicate stomach even imaginary smoke can convey damage
Tourists showing how things ought to be managed
Wrinkles should merely indicate where smiles have been




HADLEYBURG AND OTHER STORIES, by Mark Twain[MT#30][mthdb10.txt]3251

Appelles meets Zenobia, the helper of all who suffer, and tells her his
story, which moves her pity.  By common report she is endowed with more
than earthly powers; and since he cannot have the boon of death, he
appeals to her to drown his memory in forgetfulness of his griefs--
forgetfulness 'which is death's equivalent'.

I do not remember my first lie, it is too far back; but I remember my
second one very well.  I was nine days old at the time, and had noticed
that if a pin was sticking in me and I advertised it in the usual
fashion, I was lovingly petted and coddled and pitied in a most agreeable
way and got a ration between meals besides.  It was human nature to want
to get these riches, and I fell.  I lied about the pin--advertising one
when there wasn't any.  You would have done it; George Washington did it,
anybody would have done it.  During the first half of my life I never
knew a child that was able to rise above that temptation and keep from
telling that lie.

This establishment's name is Hochberghaus.  It is in Bohemia, a short
day's journey from Vienna, and being in the Austrian Empire is of course
a health resort.  The empire is made up of health resorts; it distributes
health to the whole world.  Its waters are all medicinal.  They are
bottled and sent throughout the earth; the natives themselves drink beer.

But I think I have no such prejudice.  A few years ago a Jew observed to
me that there was no uncourteous reference to his people in my books, and
asked how it happened.  It happened because the disposition was lacking.
I am quite sure that (bar one) I have no race prejudices, and I think I
have no colour prejudices nor caste prejudices nor creed prejudices.
Indeed, I know it.  I can stand any society.  All that I care to know is
that a man is a human being--that is enough for me; he can't be any
worse.




HOW TELL A STORY AND OTHERS, by Mark Twain [MT#31][mthts10.txt]3250

There are several kinds of stories, but only one difficult kind--the
humorous.  I will talk mainly about that one.  The humorous story is
American, the comic story is English, the witty story is French.  The
humorous story depends for its effect upon the manner of the telling; the
comic story and the witty story upon the matter.

The humorous story is strictly a work of art--high and delicate art--and
only an artist can tell it; but no art is necessary in telling the comic
and the witty story; anybody can do it.  The art of telling a humorous
story--understand, I mean by word of mouth, not print--was created in
America, and has remained at home.




DEFENCE OF HARRIET SHELLEY, by Mark Twain  [MT#32][mtdhs10.txt]3171

I have committed sins, of course; but I have not committed enough of them
to entitle me to the punishment of reduction to the bread and water of
ordinary literature during six years when I might have been living on the
fat diet spread for the righteous in Professor Dowden's Life of Shelley,
if I had been justly dealt with.

Yet he has been resting both for a month, with Italian, and tea, and
manna of sentiment, and late hours, and every restful thing a young
husband could need for the refreshment of weary limbs and a sore
conscience, and a nagging sense of shabbiness and treachery.

The biographer throws off that extraordinary remark without any
perceptible disturbance to his serenity; for he follows it with a
sentimental justification of Shelley's conduct which has not a pang of
conscience in it, but is silky and smooth and undulating and pious--a
cake-walk with all the colored brethren at their best.  There may be
people who can read that page and keep their temper, but it is doubtful.




FENIMORE COOPER OFFENCES, by Mark Twain    [MT#33][mtfco10.txt]3172

It seems to me that it was far from right for the Professor of English
Literature in Yale, the Professor of English Literature in Columbia, and
Wilkie Collins to deliver opinions on Cooper's literature without having
read some of it.  It would have been much more decorous to keep silent
and let persons talk who have read Cooper.

Cooper's art has some defects.  In one place in 'Deerslayer,' and in the
restricted space of two-thirds of a page, Cooper has scored 114 offences
against literary art out of a possible 115.  It breaks the record.

I may be mistaken, but it does seem to me that Deerslayer is not a work
of art in any sense; it does seem to me that it is destitute of every
detail that goes to the making of a work of art; in truth, it seems to me
that Deerslayer is just simply a literary delirium tremens.




ESSAYS ON PAUL BOURGET, by Mark Twain      [MT#34][mtpbg10.txt]3173

Bret Harte got his California and his Californians by unconscious
absorption, and put both of them into his tales alive.  But when he came
from the Pacific to the Atlantic and tried to do Newport life from study-
conscious observation--his failure was absolutely monumental.  Newport is
a disastrous place for the unacclimated observer, evidently.

It is my belief that there are some "national" traits and things
scattered about the world that are mere superstitions, frauds that have
lived so long that they have the solid look of facts.  One of them is the
dogma that the French are the only chaste people in the world.  Ever
since I arrived in France this last time I have been accumulating doubts
about that.

It would be too immodest.  Also too gratuitously generous.  And a shade
too self-sufficient.  No, he could not venture it.  It would look too
much like anxiety to get in at a feast where no plate had been provided
for him.

A foreigner can photograph the exteriors of a nation, but I think that
that is as far as he can get.  I think that no foreigner can report its
interior--its soul, its life, its speech, its thought.  I think that a
knowledge of these things is acquirable in only one way; not two or four
or six [years]--absorption; years and years of unconscious absorption;
years and years of intercourse with the life concerned; of living it,
indeed; sharing personally in its shames and prides, its joys and griefs,
its loves and hates, its prosperities and reverses, its shows and
shabbinesses, its deep patriotisms, its whirlwinds of political passion,
its adorations--of flag, and heroic dead, and the glory of the national
name.  Observation?  Of what real value is it?  One learns peoples
through the heart, not the eyes or the intellect.

One may say the type of practical joker, for these people are exactly
alike all over the world.  Their equipment is always the same: a vulgar
mind, a puerile wit, a cruel disposition as a rule, and always the spirit
of treachery.




A DOG'S TALE, by Mark Twain                [MT#35][mtdtl10.txt]3174

My father was a St. Bernard, my mother was a collie, but I am a
Presbyterian.  This is what my mother told me, I do not know these nice
distinctions myself.

And it was the same with phrases.  She would drag home a whole phrase, if
it had a grand sound, and play it six nights and two matinees, and
explain it a new way every time--which she had to, for all she cared for
was the phrase; she wasn't interested in what it meant, and knew those
dogs hadn't wit enough to catch her, anyway.  Yes, she was a daisy!  She
got so she wasn't afraid of anything, she had such confidence in the
ignorance of those creatures.

By and by came my little puppy, and then my cup was full, my happiness
was perfect.  It was the dearest little waddling thing, and so smooth and
soft and velvety, and had such cunning little awkward paws, and such
affectionate eyes, and such a sweet and innocent face; and it made me so
proud to see how the children and their mother adored it, and fondled it,
and exclaimed over every little wonderful thing it did.  It did seem to
me that life was just too lovely to--

I have watched two whole weeks, and he doesn't come up!  This last week a
fright has been stealing upon me.  I think there is something terrible
about this.  I do not know what it is, but the fear makes me sick.




A BURLESQUE AUTOBIOGRAPHY, by Mark Twain   [MT#36][mtbbg10.txt]3175

Ours is a noble old house, and stretches a long way back into antiquity.
The earliest ancestor the Twains have any record of was a friend of the
family by the name of Higgins.  This was in the eleventh century, when
our people were living in Aberdeen, county of Cork, England.  Why it is
that our long line has ever since borne the maternal name (except when
one of them now and then took a playful refuge in an alias to avert
foolishness), instead of Higgins, is a mystery which none of us has ever
felt much desire to stir.  It is a kind of vague, pretty romance, and we
leave it alone.  All the old families do that way.

Then for the next two hundred years the family tree shows a succession of
soldiers--noble, high-spirited fellows, who always went into battle
singing; right behind the army, and always went out a-whooping, right
ahead of it.

Charles Henry Twain lived during the latter part of the seventeenth
century, and was a zealous and distinguished missionary.  He converted
sixteen thousand South Sea islanders, and taught them that a dog-tooth
necklace and a pair of spectacles was not enough clothing to come to
divine service in.  His poor flock loved him very, very dearly; and when
his funeral was over, they got up in a body (and came out of the
restaurant) with tears in their eyes, and saying, one to another, that he
was a good tender missionary, and they wished they had some more of him.




THE INNOCENTS ABROAD, by Mark Twain        [MT#37][mtinn10.txt]3176

Ancient painters never succeeded in denationalizing themselves
Apocryphal New Testament
Astonishing talent for seeing things that had already passed
Bade our party a kind good-bye, and proceeded to count spoons
Base flattery to call them immoral
Bones of St Denis
But it is an ill-wind that blows nobody good
Buy the man out, goodwill and all
By dividing this statement up among eight
Carry soap with them
Chapel of the Invention of the Cross
Christopher Colombo
Clustered thick with stony, mutilated saints
Commend me to Fennimore Cooper to find beauty in the Indians
Conceived a sort of unwarrantable unfriendliness
Confer the rest of their disastrous patronage on some other firm
Creator made Italy from designs by Michael Angelo!
Cringing spirit of those great men
Diffident young man, mild of moustache, affluent of hair
Expression
Felt that it was not right to steal grapes
Fenimore Cooper Indians
Filed away among the archives of Russia--in the stove
For dismal scenery, I think Palestine must be the prince
Free from self-consciousness--which is at breakfast
Fumigation is cheaper than soap
Fun--but of a mild type
Getting rich very deliberately--very deliberately indeed
Guides
Have a prodigious quantity of mind
He never bored but he struck water
He ought to be dammed--or leveed
Holy Family always lived in grottoes
How tame a sight his country's flag is at home
I am going to try to worry along without it
I carried the sash along with me--I did not need the sash
I had a delicacy about going home and getting thrashed
I was not scared, but I was considerably agitated
Is, ah--is he dead?
It is a hopeless, dreary, heart-broken land
It is inferior--for coffee--but it is pretty fair tea
It used to be a good hotel, but that proves nothing
It was warm.  It was the warmest place I ever was in
Joshua
Journals so voluminously begun
Keg of these nails--of the true cross
Lean and mean old age
Man peculiarly and insufferably self-conceited: not seasick
Marks the exact centre of the earth
Nauseous adulation of princely patrons
Never did succeed in making those idiots understand their own language
Never left any chance for newspaper controversies
Never uses a one-syllable word when he can think of a longer one
No satisfaction in being a Pope in those days
Not afraid of a million Bedouins
Not bring ourselves to think St John had two sets of ashes
Old Travelers
One is apt to overestimate beauty when it is rare
Only solitary thing one does not smell in Turkey
Oriental splendor!
Original first shoddy contract mentioned in history
Overflowing his banks
People talk so glibly of "feeling," "expression," "tone,"
Perdition catch all the guides
Picture which one ought to see once--not oftener
Polite hotel waiter who isn't an idiot
Relic matter a little overdone?
Room to turn around in, but not to swing a cat
Saviour, who seems to be of little importance any where in Rome
Self-satisfied monarch, the railroad conductor of America
Sentimental praises of the Arab's idolatry of his horse
She assumes a crushing dignity
Shepherd's Hotel, which is the worst on earth
Smell about them which is peculiar but not entertaining
Some people can not stand prosperity
Somewhat singular taste in the matter of relics
St Charles Borromeo, Bishop of Milan
St Helena, the mother of Constantine
Starving to death
Stirring times here for a while if the last trump should blow
Tahoe means grasshoppers.  It means grasshopper soup
The information the ancients didn't have was very voluminous
The Last Supper
There was a good deal of sameness about it
They were like nearly all the Frenchwomen I ever saw--homely
They were seasick.   And I was glad of it
Those delightful parrots who have "been here before"
To give birth to an idea
Toll the signal for the St Bartholomew's Massacre
Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry and narrow-mindedness
Uncomplaining impoliteness
Under the charitable moon
Used fine tooth combs--successfully
Venitian visiting young ladies
Wandering Jew
Wasn't enough of it to make a pie
We all like to see people seasick when we are not, ourselves
Well provided with cigars and other necessaries of life
What's a fair wind for us is a head wind to them
Whichever one they get is the one they want
Who have actually forgotten their mother tongue in three months
Worth while to get tired out, because one so enjoys resting




ROUGHING IT, by Mark Twain                 [MT#38][mtrit10.txt]3177

Aim and object of the law and lawyers was to defeat justice
American saddle
Cayote is a living, breathing allegory of Want
Children were clothed in nothing but sunshine
Contempt of Court on the part of a horse
Feared a great deal more than the almighty
Fertile in invention and elastic in conscience
Give one's watch a good long undisturbed spell
He was nearly lightnin' on superintending
He was one of the deadest men that ever lived
Hotel clerk who was crusty and disobliging
I had never seen lightning go like that horse
Juries composed of fools and rascals
List of things which we had seen and some other people had not
Man was not a liar he only missed it by the skin of his teeth
Most impossible reminiscences sound plausible
Native canoe is an irresponsible looking contrivance
Never knew there was a hell!
Nothing that glitters is gold
Profound respect for chastity--in other people
Scenery in California requires distance
Slept, if one might call such a condition by so strong a name
Useful information and entertaining nonsense
Virtuous to the verge of eccentricity




THE GILDED AGE, by Twain and Warner        [MT#39][mtgld10.txt]3178

Accidental murder resulting from justifiable insanity
Always trying to build a house by beginning at the top
Appropriation
Beautiful credit!  The foundation of modern society
Believed it; because she desired to believe it
Best intentions and the frailest resolution
Big babies with beards
Cheap sentiment and high and mighty dialogue
Conscious superiority
Does your doctor know any thing
Enjoy icebergs--as scenery but not as company
Erie RR: causeway of cracked rails and cows, to the West
Fever of speculation
Final resort of the disappointed of her sex, the lecture platform
Geographical habits
Get away and find a place where he could despise himself
Gossips were soon at work
Grand old benevolent National Asylum for the Helpless
Grief that is too deep to find help in moan or groan or outcry
Haughty humility
Having no factitious weight of dignity to carry
Imagination to help his memory
Invariably advised to settle--no matter how, but settle
Invariably allowed a half for shrinkage in his statements
Is this your first visit?
It had cost something to upholster these women
Large amount of money necessary to make a small hole
Later years brought their disenchanting wisdom
Let me take your grief and help you carry it
Life a vanity and a burden, and the future but a way to death
Mail train which has never run over a cow
Meant no harm they only wanted to know
Money is most difficult to get when people need it most
Never sewed when she could avoid it.  Bless her!
Nursed his woe and exalted it
Predominance of the imagination over the judgment
Question was asked and answered--in their eyes
Riches enough to be able to gratify reasonable desires
Road, which did not seem to know its own mind exactly
Sarcasms of fate
Sleep that heals all heart-aches and ends all sorrows
Small gossip stood a very poor chance
Sun bothers along over the Atlantic
Think a Congress of ours could convict the devil of anything
Titles never die in America
Too much grace and too little wine
Understood the virtues of "addition, division and silence"
Unlimited reliance upon human promises
Very pleasant man if you were not in his way
Wasn't worth a cent two years ago, and now I owe two millions
"We must create, a public opinion," said Senator Dilworthy
We'll make you think you never was at home before
We've all got to come to it at last, anyway!
Widened, and deepened, and straightened--(Public river Project)
Wished that she could see his sufferings now
Your absence when you are present




THE AMERICAN CLAIMANT, by Mark Twain       [MT#40][mtacl10.txt]3179

He's a kind of an aristocrat, his father being a doctor, and you know
what style that is--in England, I mean, because in this country a doctor
ain't so very much, even if he's that.

Hasn't any culture but the artificial culture of books, which adorns but
doesn't really educate.

A discriminating irreverence is the creator and protector of human
liberty.

The exercise of an extraordinary gift is the supremest pleasure in life.

Oh, just to work--that is life!  No matter what the work is--that's of no
consequence.  Just work itself is bliss when a man's been starving for
it.

What right has Goethe, what right has Arnold, what right has any
dictionary, to define the word Irreverence for me?  What their ideals are
is nothing to me.  So long as I reverence my own  ideals my whole duty is
done, and I commit no profanation if I laugh at theirs.  I may scoff at
other people's ideals as much as I want to.  It is my right and my
privilege.  No man has any right to deny it.

No throne was ever set up by the unhampered vote of a majority of any
nation; and that hence no throne exists that has a right to exist, and no
symbol of it, flying from any flagstaff, is righteously entitled to wear
any device but the skull and crossbones of that kindred industry which
differs from royalty only business-wise--merely as retail differs from
wholesale.




DOUBLE BARRELLED DETECTIVE, by Mark Twain  [MT#41][mtdbd10.txt]3180

"We ought never to do wrong when people are looking."

"The regularest man that ever was," said Jake Parker, the blacksmith:
"you can tell when it's twelve just by him leaving, without looking at
your Waterbury."

"The sheriff that lets a mob take a prisoner away from him is the lowest-
down coward there is.  By the statistics there was a hundred and eighty-
two of them drawing sneak pay in America last year.  By the way it's
going, pretty soon there 'll be a new disease in the doctor-books--
sheriff complaint."  That idea pleased him--any one could see it.
"People will say, 'Sheriff sick again?'  'Yes; got the same old thing.'
And next there 'll be a new title.  People won't say, 'He's running for
sheriff of Rapaho County,' for instance; they'll say, 'He's running for
Coward of Rapaho.'  Lord, the idea of a grown-up person being afraid of a
lynch mob!"




THE STOLEN WHITE ELEPHANT, by Mark Twain   [MT#42][mtswe10.txt]3181

[Left out of A Tramp Abroad, because it was feared that some of the
particulars had been exaggerated, and that others were not true.  Before
these suspicions had been proven groundless, the book had gone to press.
--M. T.]

"Well, as to what he eats--he will eat anything.  He will eat a man, he
will eat a Bible--he will eat anything between a man and a Bible."--"Good
very good, indeed, but too general.  Details are necessary--details are
the only valuable things in our trade.  Very well--as to men.  At one
meal--or, if you prefer, during one day--how man men will he eat, if
fresh?"--"He would not care whether they were fresh or not; at a single
meal he would eat five ordinary men."

Elephant arrived here from the south and passed through toward the forest
at 11.50, dispersing a funeral on the way, and diminishing the mourners
by two.




RAMBLING IDLE EXCURSION, by Mark Twain     [MT#43][mtrid10.txt]3182

Straight roads reveal everything at a glance and kill interest.

All the journeyings I had ever done had been purely in the way of
business.  The pleasant May weather suggested a novelty namely, a trip
for pure recreation, the bread-and-butter element left out.  The Reverend
said he would go, too; a good man, one of the best of men, although a
clergyman.

We went ashore and found a novelty of a pleasant nature: there were no
hackmen, hacks, or omnibuses on the pier or about it anywhere, and nobody
offered his services to us, or molested us in any way.  I said it was
like being in heaven.  The Reverend rebukingly and rather pointedly
advised me to make the most of it, then.

There's cats around here with names that would surprise you.  "Maria" (to
his wife), "what was that cat's name that eat a keg of ratsbane by
mistake over at Hooper's, and started home and got struck by lightning
and took the blind staggers and fell in the well and was 'most drowned
before they could fish him out?"--"That was that colored Deacon Jackson's
cat.  I only remember the last end of its name, which was Hold-The-Fort-
For-I-Am-Coming Jackson."




CARNIVAL OF CRIME IN CT., by Mark Twain    [MT#44][mtccc10.txt]3183

"Yes, but you did; you lied to him."--I felt a guilty pang--in truth, I
had felt it forty times before that tramp had traveled a block from my
door--but still I resolved to make a show of feeling slandered; so I
said:  "This is a baseless impertinence.  I said to the tramp--
"There--wait.  You were about to lie again.  I know what you said to him.
You said the cook was gone down-town and there was nothing left from
breakfast.  Two lies.  You knew the cook was behind the door, and plenty
of provisions behind her."

I never did a thing in all my life, virtuous or otherwise, that I didn't
repent of in twenty-four hours.

In conclusion, I wish to state, by way of advertisement, that medical
colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes, either by the
gross, by cord measurement, or per ton, will do well to examine the lot
in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere, as these were all selected and
prepared by myself, and can be had at a low rate; because I wish to
clear, out my stock and get ready for the spring trade.




ALONZO FITZ AND OTHERS, by Mark Twain      [MT#45][mtlaf10.txt]3184

It was well along in the forenoon of a bitter winter's day.  The town of
Eastport, in the state of Maine, lay buried under a deep snow that was
newly fallen.  The customary bustle in the streets was wanting.  One
could look long distances down them and see nothing but a dead-white
emptiness, with silence to match.  Of course I do not mean that you could
see the silence--no, you could only hear it.

"That clock's wrong again.  That clock hardly ever knows what time it is;
and when it does know, it lies about it--which amounts to the same thing.
Alfred!"




THOSE EXTRAORDINARY TWINS, by Mark Twain   [MT#46][mtext10.txt]3185

A man who is born with the novel-writing gift has a troublesome time of
it when he tries to build a novel.  I know this from experience.  He has
no clear idea of his story; in fact he has no story.  He merely has some
people in his mind, and an incident or two, also a locality.  He knows
these people, he knows the selected locality, and he trusts that he can
plunge those people into those incidents with interesting results.  So he
goes to work.  To write a novel?  No--that is a thought which comes
later; in the beginning he is only proposing to tell a little tale; a
very little tale; a six-page tale.  But as it is a tale which he is not
acquainted with, and can only find out what it is by listening as it goes
along telling itself, it is more than apt to go on and on and on till it
spreads itself into a book.  I know about this, because it has happened
to me so many times.

I didn't know what to do with her.  I was as sorry for her as anybody
could be, but the campaign was over, the book was finished, she was
sidetracked, and there was no possible way of crowding her in, anywhere.
I could not leave her there, of course; it would not