some of the
particulars had been exaggerated, and that others were not true.  Before
these suspicions had been proven groundless, the book had gone to press.
--M. T.]

"Well, as to what he eats--he will eat anything.  He will eat a man, he
will eat a Bible--he will eat anything between a man and a Bible."--"Good
very good, indeed, but too general.  Details are necessary--details are
the only valuable things in our trade.  Very well--as to men.  At one
meal--or, if you prefer, during one day--how man men will he eat, if
fresh?"--"He would not care whether they were fresh or not; at a single
meal he would eat five ordinary men.

Elephant arrived here from the south and passed through toward the forest
at 11.50, dispersing a funeral on the way, and diminishing the mourners
by two.




RAMBLING IDLE EXCURSION, by Mark Twain     [MT#43][mtrid10.txt]3182

Straight roads reveal everything at a glance and kill interest.

All the journeyings I had ever done had been purely in the way of
business.  The pleasant May weather suggested a novelty namely, a trip
for pure recreation, the bread-and-butter element left out.  The Reverend
said he would go, too; a good man, one of the best of men, although a
clergyman.

We went ashore and found a novelty of a pleasant nature: there were no
hackmen, hacks, or omnibuses on the pier or about it anywhere, and nobody
offered his services to us, or molested us in any way.  I said it was
like being in heaven.  The Reverend rebukingly and rather pointedly
advised me to make the most of it, then.

There's cats around here with names that would surprise you.  "Maria" (to
his wife), "what was that cat's name that eat a keg of ratsbane by
mistake over at Hooper's, and started home and got struck by lightning
and took the blind staggers and fell in the well and was 'most drowned 
before they could fish him out?"--"That was that colored Deacon Jackson's
cat.  I only remember the last end of its name, which was Hold-The-Fort-
For-I-Am-Coming Jackson."




CARNIVAL OF CRIME IN CT., by Mark Twain    [MT#44][mtccc10.txt]3183

Yes, but you did; you lied to him."--I felt a guilty pang--in truth, I
had felt it forty times before that tramp had traveled a block from my
door--but still I resolved to make a show of feeling slandered; so I
said:  "This is a baseless impertinence.  I said to the tramp--"--
"There--wait.  You were about to lie again.  I know what you said to him. 
You said the cook was gone down-town and there was nothing left from
breakfast.  Two lies.  You knew the cook was behind the door, and plenty
of provisions behind her."

I never did a thing in all my life, virtuous or otherwise, that I didn't
repent of in twenty-four hours.

In conclusion, I wish to state, by way of advertisement, that medical
colleges desiring assorted tramps for scientific purposes, either by the
gross, by cord measurement, or per ton, will do well to examine the lot
in my cellar before purchasing elsewhere, as these were all selected and
prepared by myself, and can be had at a low rate; because I wish to
clear, out my stock and get ready for the spring trade.




ALONZO FITZ AND OTHERS, by Mark Twain      [MT#45][mtlaf10.txt]3184

It was well along in the forenoon of a bitter winter's day.  The town of
Eastport, in the state of Maine, lay buried under a deep snow that was
newly fallen.  The customary bustle in the streets was wanting.  One
could look long distances down them and see nothing but a dead-white
emptiness, with silence to match.  Of course I do not mean that you could
see the silence--no, you could only hear it.

"That clock's wrong again.  That clock hardly ever knows what time it is;
and when it does know, it lies about it--which amounts to the same thing. 
Alfred!"




THOSE EXTRAORDINARY TWINS, by Mark Twain   [MT#46][mtext10.txt]3185

A man who is born with the novel-writing gift has a troublesome time of
it when he tries to build a novel.  I know this from experience.  He has
no clear idea of his story; in fact he has no story.  He merely has some
people in his mind, and an incident or two, also a locality.  He knows
these people, he knows the selected locality, and he trusts that he can
plunge those people into those incidents with interesting results.  So he
goes to work.  To write a novel?  No--that is a thought which comes
later; in the beginning he is only proposing to tell a little tale; a
very little tale; a six-page tale.  But as it is a tale which he is not
acquainted with, and can only find out what it is by listening as it goes
along telling itself, it is more than apt to go on and on and on till it
spreads itself into a book.  I know about this, because it has happened
to me so many times.

I didn't know what to do with her.  I was as sorry for her as anybody
could be, but the campaign was over, the book was finished, she was
sidetracked, and there was no possible way of crowding her in, anywhere. 
I could not leave her there, of course; it would not do.  After spreading
her out so, and making such a to-do over her affairs, it would be
absolutely necessary to account to the reader for her.  I thought and
thought and studied and studied; but I arrived at nothing.  I finally saw
plainly that there was really no way but one--I must simply give her the
grand bounce.  It grieved me to do it, for after associating with her so
much I had come to kind of like her after a fashion, notwithstanding she
was such an ass and said such stupid irritating things and was so
nauseatingly sentimental.  Still it had to be done.  So, at the top of
Chapter XVII, I put in a "Calendar" remark concerning July Fourth, and
began the chapter with this statistic: "Rowena went out in the back yard
after supper to see the fireworks and fell down the well and got
drowned."  It seemed abrupt, but I thought maybe the reader wouldn't
notice it, because I changed the subject right away to something else.  




THE MYSTERIOUS STRANGER, by Mark Twain     [MT#47][mtmst10.txt]3186

It was in 1590--winter.  Austria was far away from the world, and asleep;
it was still the Middle Ages in Austria, and promised to remain so
forever.  Some even set it away back centuries upon centuries and said
that by the mental and spiritual clock it was still the Age of Belief in
Austria.  But they meant it as a compliment, not a slur, and it was so
taken, and we were all proud of it.  I remember it well, although I was
only a boy; and I remember, too, the pleasure it gave me.  

When we were finishing our house, we found we had a little cash left
over, on account of the plumber not knowing it.

I will explain that whenever I want a thing, and Mrs. McWilliams wants
another thing, and we decide upon the thing that Mrs. McWilliams wants--
as we always do--she calls that a compromise.  

What an ass you are!" he said.  "Are you so unobservant as not to have
found out that sanity and happiness are an impossible combination?  No
sane man can be happy, for to him life is real, and he sees what a
fearful thing it is.  Only the mad can be happy, and not many of those. 
The few that imagine themselves kings or gods are happy, the rest are no
happier than the sane.  Of course, no man is entirely in his right mind
at any time, but I have been referring to the extreme cases.

"Now there is the history of that burglar alarm--everything just as it
happened; nothing extenuated, and naught set down in malice.  Yes, sir,--
and when I had slept nine years with burglars, and maintained an
expensive burglar alarm the whole time, for their protection, not mine,
and at my sole cost--for not a d---d cent could I ever get THEM to
contribute--I just said to Mrs.  McWilliams that I had had enough of that
kind of pie; so with her full consent I took the whole thing out and
traded it off for a dog, and shot the dog.




CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, by Mark Twain           [MT#48][mtcsc10.txt]3187

This last summer, when I was on my way back to Vienna from the Appetite-
Cure in the mountains, I fell over a cliff in the twilight, and broke
some arms and legs and one thing or another, and by good luck was found
by some peasants who had lost an ass, and they carried me to the nearest
habitation, which was one of those large, low, thatch-roofed farm-houses,
with apartments in the garret for the family, and a cunning little porch
under the deep gable decorated with boxes of bright colored flowers and
cats; on the ground floor a large and light sitting-room, separated from
the milch-cattle apartment by a partition; and in the front yard rose
stately and fine the wealth and pride of the house, the manure-pile. 
That sentence is Germanic, and shows that I am acquiring that sort of
mastery of the art and spirit of the language which enables a man to
travel all day in one sentence without changing cars.  

"I do not understand it.  I believe she has not diagnosed the case with
sufficient care.  Did she look like a person who was theorizing, or did
she look like one who has fallen off precipices herself and brings to the
aid of abstract science the confirmations of personal experience?"--
"Bitte?" --It was too large a contract for the Stubenmadchen's
vocabulary; she couldn't call the hand.  I allowed the subject to rest
there, and asked for something to eat and smoke, and something hot to
drink, and a basket to pile my legs in; but I could not have any of these
things.

Does she seem to be in full and functionable possession of her
intellectual plant, such as it is?"--"Bitte?"--"Do they let her run at
large, or do they tie her up?" 




MARK TWAIN'S SPEECHES, by Mark Twain       [MT#49][mtmts10.txt]3188

A little pride always goes along with a teaspoonful of brains
Ain't any real difference between triplets and an insurrection
Chastity, you can carry it too far
Classic: everybody wants to have read and nobody wants to read
Don't know anything and can't do anything
Dwell on the particulars with senile rapture
Future great historian is lying--and doubtless will continue to
Head is full of history, and some of it is true, too
Humor enlivens and enlightens his morality
I shall never be as dead again as I was then
If can't make seventy by any but an uncomfortable road: don't go
Kill a lot of poets for writing about "Beautiful Spring"
Live upon the property of their heirs so long
Morality is all the better for his humor
Morals: rather teach them than practice them any day
Never been in jail, and the other is, I don't know why
Never to smoke when asleep, and never to refrain when awake
Patriotism is usually the refuge of the scoundrel
Please state what figure you hold him at--and return the basket
Principles is another name for prejudices
She bears our children--ours as a general thing
Some civilized women would lose half their charm without dress
The Essex band done the best it could
Time-expired man, to use Kipling's military phrase
To exaggerate is the only way I can approximate to the truth
Two kinds of Christian morals, one private and the other public
What, sir, would the people of the earth be without woman?
When in doubt, tell the truth
Women always want to know what is going on




SKETCHES NEW AND OLD, by Mark Twain        [MT#50][mtsno10.txt]3189

A wood-fire is not a permanent thing
Accessory before the fact to his own murder
Aggregate to positive unhappiness
Always brought in 'not guilty'
Apocryphal was no slouch of a word, emanating from the source
Assertion is not proof
Early to bed and early to rise
I am useless and a nuisance, a cumberer of the earth
I never was so scared before and survived it
If I had sprung a leak now I had been lost
Just about cats enough for three apiece all around
Looked a look of vicious happiness
Lucid and unintoxicated intervals
No matter how absurd and unreasonable their demands
No public can withstand magnanimity
Not because I was afraid, but because I wanted to (go out the window)
Permanent reliable enemy
Science only needed a spoonful of supposition to build a mountain
State of mind bordering on impatience
Walking five miles to fish
Was a good deal annoyed when it appeared he was going to die




1601, by Mark Twain                        [MT#51][mtsxn10.txt]3190

But suppose a literary artist ventured to go into a painstaking and
elaborate description of one of these grisly things--the critics would
skin him alive.  Well, let it go, it cannot be helped; Art retains her
privileges, Literature has lost hers.  Somebody else may cipher out the
whys and the wherefores and the consistencies of it--I haven't got time."

Albert Bigelow Paine, Mark Twain's biographer, likewise acknowledged its
greatness, when he said, "1601 is a genuine classic, as classics of that
sort go.  It is better than the gross obscenities of Rabelais, and
perhaps in some day to come, the taste that justified Gargantua and the
Decameron will give this literary refugee shelter and setting among the
more conventional writing of Mark Twain.  Human taste is a curious thing;
delicacy is purely a matter of environment and point of view."

Suppose Sir Walter [Scott] instead of putting the conversation into the
mouths of his characters, had allowed the characters to speak for
themselves?  We should have had talk from Rebecca and Ivanhoe and the
soft lady Rowena which would embarrass a tramp in our day.  However, to
the unconsciously indelicate all things are delicate."




GOLDSMITH'S FRIEND ABROAD AGAIN, by Twain   [MT#52][mtgfa10.txt]3191

No experience is set down in the following letters which had to be
invented.  Fancy is not needed to give variety to the history of a
Chinaman's sojourn in America.  Plain fact is amply sufficient.

DEAR CHING-FOO: It is all settled, and I am to leave my oppressed and
overburdened native land and cross the sea to that noble realm where all
are free and all equal, and none reviled or abused--America!  

But he said, wait a minute--I must be vaccinated to prevent my taking the
small-pox.  I smiled and said I had already had the small-pox, as he
could see by the marks, and so I need not wait to be "vaccinated," as he
called it.  But he said it was the law, and I must be vaccinated anyhow. 
The doctor would never let me pass, for the law obliged him to vaccinate
all Chinamen and charge them ten dollars apiece for it, and I might be
sure that no doctor who would be the servant of that law would let a fee
slip through his fingers to accommodate any absurd fool who had seen fit
to have the disease in some other country.

And I grew still more uneasy, when I found that any succored and
befriended refugee from Ireland or elsewhere could stand up before that
judge and swear, away the life or liberty or character of a refugee from
China; but that by the law of the land the Chinaman could not testify
against the Irishman.




CURIOUS REPUBLIC OF GONDOUR, by Mark Twain [MT#53][mtcrg10.txt]3192

I found that the nation had at first tried universal suffrage pure and
simple, but had thrown that form aside because the result was not
satisfactory.  It had seemed to deliver all power into the hands of the
ignorant and non-tax-paying classes; and of a necessity the responsible
offices were filled from these classes also.

That last--and saddest evidence of intellectual poverty, the Pun.

Mrs.  Murphy jumped to the conclusion that it would only cost two or
three dollars to embalm her dead husband, and so she telegraphed "Yes." 
It was at the "wake" that the bill for embalming arrived and was
presented to the widow.  She uttered a wild, sad wail, that pierced every
heart, and said: "Sivinty-foive dollars for stoofhn' Dan, blister their
sowls!  Did thim divils suppose I was goin' to stairt a Museim, that I'd
be dalin' in such expinsive curiassities!"

I kind of dodged, and the boot-jack broke the looking-glass.  I could
have waited to see what became of the other missiles if I had wanted to,
but I took no interest in such things.




TWAIN'S LETTERS V1 1835-1866 by A. B. Paine[MT#54][mt1lt10.txt]3193

A mighty national menace to sham
All talk and no cider
Condition my room is always in when you are not around
Deprived of the soothing consolation of swearing
Frankness is a jewel; only the young can afford it
Genius defies the laws of perspective
Hope deferred maketh the heart sick
I never greatly envied anybody but the dead
In the long analysis of the ages it is the truth that counts
Just about enough cats to go round
Moral bulwark reared against hypocrisy and superstition
The coveted estate of silence, time's only absolute gift
We went outside to keep from getting wet
What a pleasure there is in revenge!
When in doubt, tell the truth
When it is my turn, I don't




TWAIN'S LETTERS V2 1867-1875 by A. B. Paine[MT#55][mt2lt10.txt]3194

DEAR REDPATH,--I wish you would get me released from the lecture at
Buffalo.  I mortally hate that society there, and I don't doubt they
hired me.  I once gave them a packed house free of charge, and they never
even had the common politeness to thank me.  They left me to shift for
myself, too, a la Bret Harte at Harvard.  Get me rid of Buffalo! 
Otherwise I'll have no recourse left but to get sick the day I lecture
there.  I can get sick easy enough.

I send you No. 5 today.  I have written and re-written the first half of
it three different times, yesterday and today, and at last Mrs. Clemens
says it will do.  I never saw a woman so hard to please about things she
doesn't know anything about.  Yours ever,  MARK.

This is the place to get a poor opinion of everybody in.  There isn't one
man in Washington, in civil office, who has the brains of Anson
Burlingame--and I suppose if China had not seized and saved his great
talents to the world, this government would have discarded him when his
time was up.  There are more pitiful intellects in this Congress!  Oh,
geeminy!  There are few of them that I find pleasant enough company to
visit.  I am most infernally tired of Wash.  and its "attractions."  To
be busy is a man's only happiness--and I am--otherwise I should die
Yrs.  aff.   SAM.




TWAIN'S LETTERS V3 1876-1885 by A. B. Paine[MT#56][mt3lt10.txt]3195

It is interesting to note that in thanking Clemens for his compliment
Howells wrote: "What people cannot see is that I analyze as little as
possible; they go on talking about the analytical school, which I am
supposed to belong to, and I want to thank you for using your eyes..... 
Did you ever read De Foe's 'Roxana'?  If not, then read it, not merely
for some of the deepest insights into the lying, suffering, sinning,
well-meaning human soul, but for the best and most natural English that a
book was ever written in."

Pray offer my most sincere and respectful approval to the President--is
approval the proper word?  I find it is the one I most value here in the
household and seldomest get.

In the same letter he suggests to his brother that he undertake an
absolutely truthful autobiography, a confession in which nothing is to be
withheld.  He cites the value of Casanova's memories, and the confessions
of Rousseau.

And I say this also: He that waiteth for all men to be satisfied with his
plan, let him seek eternal life, for he shall need it.

Well-good-bye, and a short life and a merry one be yours.  Poor old
Methusaleh, how did he manage to stand it so long?

You are assisted in your damaging work by the tyrannous ways of a
village-- villagers watch each other and so make cowards of each other.




TWAIN'S LETTERS V4 1886-1900 by A. B. Paine[MT#57][mt4lt10.txt]3196

And I have been an author for 20 years and an ass for 55
Argument against suicide
Conversationally being yelled at
Dead people who go through the motions of life
Die in the promptest kind of a way and no fooling around
Heroic endurance that resembles contentment
Honest men must be pretty scarce
I wonder how they can lie so.  It comes of practice, no doubt
If this is going to be too much trouble to you
One should be gentle with the ignorant
Sunday is the only day that brings unbearable leisure
Symbol of the human race ought to be an ax
What a pity it is that one's adventures never happen!




TWAIN'S LETTERS V5 1901-1906 by A. B. Paine[MT#58][mt5lt10.txt]3197

I have seen that iceberg thirty-four times in thirty-seven voyages; it is
always the same shape, it is always the same size, it always throws up
the same old flash when the sun strikes it; you may set it on any New
York door-step of a June morning and light it up with a mirror-flash; and
I will engage to recognize it.  It is artificial, and it is provided and
anchored out by the steamer companies.  I used to like the sea, but I was
young then, and could easily get excited over any kind of monotony, and
keep it up till the monotonies ran out, if it was a fortnight.

It vexes me to catch myself praising the clean private citizen Roosevelt,
and blaming the soiled President Roosevelt, when I know that neither
praise nor blame is due to him for any thought or word or deed of his, he
being merely a helpless and irresponsible coffee-mill ground by the hand
of God.

It was a presidential year and the air was thick with politics.  Mark
Twain was no longer actively interested in the political situation; he
was only disheartened by the hollowness and pretense of office-seeking,
and the methods of office-seekers in general. 

Shall we ever laugh again?  If I could only see a dog that I knew in the
old times! and could put my arms around his neck and tell him all,
everything, and ease my heart.  Think--in 3 hours it will be a week!--and
soon a month; and by and by a year.  How fast our dead fly from us.

Aldrich was here half an hour ago, like a breeze from over the fields,
with the fragrance still upon his spirit.  I am tired of waiting for that
man to get old.

When a man is a pessimist before 48 he knows too much; if he is an
optimist after it, he knows too little.




TWAIN'S LETTERS V6 1907-1910 by A. B. Paine[MT#59][mt6lt10.txt]3198

That doctor had half an idea that there is something the matter with my
brain.  .  .  Doctors do know so little and they do charge so much for
it.

You ought not to say sarcastic things about my "fighting on the other
side."  General Grant did not act like that.  General Grant paid me
compliments.  He bracketed me with Zenophon--it is there in his Memoirs
for anybody to read.  He said if all the confederate soldiers had
followed my example and adopted my military arts he could never have
caught enough of them in a bunch to inconvenience the Rebellion.  General
Grant was a fair man, and recognized my worth; but you are prejudiced,
and you have hurt my feelings.

DEAR HOWELLS,--I have to write a line, lazy as I am, to say how your Poe
article delighted me; and to say that I am in agreement with
substantially all you say about his literature.  To me his prose is
unreadable--like Jane Austin's.  No, there is a difference.  I could read
his prose on salary, but not Jane's.  Jane is entirely impossible.  It
seems a great pity that they allowed her to die a natural death.




COMPLETE LETTERS OF MARK TWAIN, by Paine   [MT#60][mtclt10.txt]3199

That doctor had half an idea that there is something the matter with my
brain.  .  .  Doctors do know so little and they do charge so much for
it.

Shall we ever laugh again?  If I could only see a dog that I knew in the
old times! and could put my arms around his neck and tell him all,
everything, and ease my heart.  Think--in 3 hours it will be a week!--and
soon a month; and by and by a year.  How fast our dead fly from us.

I used to like the sea, but I was young then, and could easily get
excited over any kind of monotony, and keep it up till the monotonies ran
out.

And I say this also: He that waiteth for all men to be satisfied with his
plan, let him seek eternal life, for he shall need it.

Well-good-bye, and a short life and a merry one be yours.  Poor old
Methusaleh, how did he manage to stand it so long?

You are assisted in your damaging work by the tyrannous ways of a
village-- villagers watch each other and so make cowards of each other.




[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS

FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG
WORKS OF OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES




CONTENTS:

The Autocrat at the Breakfast Table ........ [Etext #751]  aofbt10.txt
The Professor at the Breakfast Table ....... [Etext #2665] prabt10.txt
The Poet at the Breakfast Table ............ [Etext #2666] ptabt10.txt
Over the Teacups ........................... [Etext #2689] teacp10.txt
Elsie Venner ............................... [Etext #2696] elsie10.txt
The Guardian Angel ......................... [Etext #2697] angel10.txt
A Mortal Antipathy ......................... [Etext #2698] antip10.txt
Passages from an Old Volume of Life ........ [Etext #2706] pages10.txt
Medical Essays ............................. [Etext #2700] medic10.txt
The Entire Gutenberg Files of Holmes ....... [Etext #3252] ohent10.txt





                              EDITOR'S NOTE

Readers well acquainted with the works of Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes
may wish to see if their favorite passages are listed in this
selection.  The etext editor will be glad to add your suggestions.
One of the advantages of internet over paper publication is the ease
of quick revision.

All the titles  may be found using the Project Gutenberg search engine:

                     http://promo.net/pg/

After downloading a specific file, the location and complete context of
the quotations  may be found by inserting a small part of the quotation
into the 'Find' or 'Search' functions of the user's word processing
program.

The quotations are in two formats:
     1. Small passages from the text.
     2. A list alphabetized of one-liners.

The editor may be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net> for comments,
questions or suggested additions to these extracts.

D.W.





                           WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS



THE AUTOCRAT AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
(Originally published at Project Gutenberg by David Price)
[Etext #751] aofbt10.txt or aofbt10.zip

A little queer and uncertain in general aspect.
A misprint kills a sensitive author
A nail will pick a lock that defies hatchet and hammer
Absolute, peremptory facts are bullies
Advised every literary man to have a profession.
Afraid of books who have not handled them from infancy
Age and neglect united gradually
Agreed on certain ultimata of belief
Algebraic symbols of minds which have grown too weak
All his geese are swans
All men are bores, except when we want them
All men love all women
All the forms of moral excellence, except truth
All want to reach old age and grumble when they get it
And now we two are walking the long path in peace together
Another privilege of talking is to misquote
Arc in the movement of a large intellect
As a child, he should have tumbled about in a library
As I understand truth
As to clever people's hating each other
Asked Solon what made him dare to be so obstinate
Assume a standard of judgment in our own minds
At the mercy of every superior mind
Audacious self-esteem, with good ground for it
Automatic and involuntary actions of the mind
Babbage's calculating machine
Be very careful to whom you trust one of these keys
Beautiful effects from wit,--all the prismatic colors
Been in the same precise circumstances before
Behave like men and gentlemen about it, if you know how.
Bells which small trades-people connect with their shop-doors
Better too few words, from the woman we love
Bill which will render pockets a superfluity in your next suit
Blank checks of intellectual bankruptcy
Bowing and nodding over the music
Brain often runs away with the heart's best blood
Brilliant flashes--of silence!
Brute beasts of the intellectual domain
Bury in it beliefs, doubts, dreams, hopes, and terrors
But it was in talking of Life that we came most nearly together
But we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.
C'est le DERNIER pas qui co–te
Called an old man for the first time
Cel… va sans dire
Character is distinctly shown at the age of  or  months.
Cigar
Clairvoyance which sees into things without opening them
Code of finalities is a necessary condition of profitable talk
Comfort is essential to enjoyment
Commerce is just putting his granite foot upon them
Common sense was good enough for him
Common sense, as you understand it.
Compare the racer with the trotter
Conceit has the virtue of making them cheerful
Conceit is just a natural thing to human minds
Conclusion that he or she is really dull
Consciousness of carrying a "settler" in the form of a fact
Controversy
Conversation which is suggestive rather than argumentative
Conversational blank checks or counters
Conversational bully
Conversational fungi spring up most luxuriantly
Conversational soprano
Creative action is not voluntary at all
Crippled souls
Crow with a king-bird after him
Cut your climate to your constitution
Dangerous subjects
Demand for intellectual labor is so enormous
Did I believe in love at first sight?
Differ on the fundamental principles
Dishwater from the washings of English dandyism
Disputing about remainders and fractions
Do you ever wonder why poets talk so much about flowers?
Do you know how important good jockeying is to authors?
Don't believe any man ever talked like that in this world
Don't ever think the poetry is dead in an old man
Don't make your moral staple consist of the negative virtues
Doomed to the pangs of an undeceived self-estimate
Dulness is not commonly a game fish
Easier to dispute it than to disprove it
Easier to say this than to prove it
Elysian abandonment of a huge recumbent chair.
Every person's feelings have a front-door and a side-door
Extra talent does sometimes make people jealous
Facts always yield the place of honor, in conversation
Few, if any, were ruined by drinking
Flash terms for words which truly characterize their objects.
Fortune had left her, sorrow had baptized her
Fortune is the measure of intelligence
Friendship authorizes you to say disagreeable things
Gambling with dice or stocks
Gambling, on the great scale, is not republican
Generally ruined before they became drunkards
Genius in an essentially common person is detestable
Gift of seeing themselves in the true light
Give it an intellectual shake and hold it up to the light
Give us the luxuries of life
Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris
Good feeling helps society to make liars of most of us
Good for nothing until they have been long kept and used
Got his hand up, as a pointer lifts his forefoot
Governed, not by, but according to laws
Grave without a stone where nothing but a man is buried
Great silent-moving misery puts a new stamp on us
Grow old early, if you would be old long
Grow we must, if we outgrow all that we love.
Habit is a labor-saving invention
Hard it is for some people to get out of a room
He that has once done you a kindness
He who is carried by horses must deal with rogues
Height of art to conceal art
Her breathing was somewhat hurried and high, or thoracic
Here lies buried the soul of the licentiate Pedro Garcias
Hire logic, in the shape of a lawyer
Hold their outspread hands over your head
Holes in all her pockets
Hoped he did deserve a little abuse occasionally
Hopelessly dull discourse acts inductively
How long will school-keeping take to kill you?
Hung with moss, looking like bearded Druids
Hydrostatic paradox of controversy
I allow no "facts " at this table
I always believed in life rather than in books
I always break down when folks cry in my face
I am my own son, as it seems to me
I had not thought love was ever meant for me.
I hate books
I have lived by the sea-shore and by the mountains
I have taken all knowledge to be my province
I love horses
I never think I have hit hard unless it rebounds
I replied with my usual forbearance
I show my thought, another his
I tell my secrets too easily when I am downhearted.
I think I have not been attacked enough for it
If I thought I should ever see the Alps!
If so and so, we should have been this or that
If they have run as well as they knew how!
Il faut ne pas BRUTALISER la machine
In what direction we are moving
Incipit Allegoria Senectutis.
Infinite ocean of similitudes and analogies
Insanity
Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked
Intellectual companions can be found easily
Is this the mighty occan?--is this all?
It is by little things that we know ourselves
It is pleasant to be foolish at the right time
Judge men's minds by comparing with mine
Keep his wit in the background
Key to this side-door
Knowledge and timber only useful when seasoned
La main de fer sous le gant de velours
Laid the egg of the Reformation which Luther hatched
Laughs at times at the grand airs "Science" puts on
Law of the road with regard to handsome faces
Leading a string of my mind's daughters to market
Leap at a single bound into celebrity
Learn anything twice as easily as in my earlier days
Leave your friend to learn unpleasant truths from his enemies
Lecturer is public property
Let us cry!
Liability of all men to be elected to public office
Life is maintained by the respiration of oxygen and of sentiment
Life would be nothing without paper-credit
Like taking the cat in your lap after holding a squirrel
Listen to what others say about subjects you have studied
Little great man
Little muscle which knows its importance
Little narrow streaks of specialized knowledge
Live on the reputation of the reputation they might have made
Living in a narrow world of dry habits
Logic
Logicians carry the surveyor's chain over the track
Long illness is the real vampyrism
Look through the silvered rings of the arcus senilis!
Love is sparingly soluble in the words of men
Love must be either rich or rosy
Love-capacity is a congenital endowment
Lying is unprofitable
Made up your mind to do when you ask them for advice
Man is father to the boy that was
Man of family
Man who means to be honest for a literary pickpocket
Man's and a woman's dusting a library
Man's first life-story shall clean him out, so to speak
Mathematical fact
May doubt everything to-day if I will only do it civilly
Meaningless blushing
Mechanical invention had exhausted itself
Memory is a net
Men are fools, cowards, and liars all at once
Men grow sweet a little while before they begin to decay
Men of facts wait their turn in grim silence
Men that it weakens one to talk with an hour
Men that know everything except how to make a living
Men who have found new occupations when growing old
Might have hired an EARTHQUAKE for less money!
Moralist and occasional sermonizer
Most of our common, working beliefs are probabilities
Moved as if all her articulations were elbow-joints
Much ashamed of some people for retaining their reason
Must be weaned from his late suppers now
Must not read such a string of verses too literally
Must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it
Napoleon's test
Nature dresses and undresses them
Nature, who always has her pockets full of seeds
Nearest approach to flying that man has ever made
Neither make too much of flaws or overstatements
Never forget where they have put their money
No fresh truth ever gets into a book
No man knows his own voice
Nobody is so old he doesn't think he can live a year
Nutritious diet of active sympathetic benevolence
Oblivion as residuary legatee
Oblivion's Uncatalogued Library
Odious trick of speech or manners must be got rid of.
Oh, so patient she is, this imperturbable Nature!
Old Age
Old age appear as a series of personal insults and indignities
Old jokes are dynamometers of mental tension
One can generally tell these wholesale thieves easily enough
One doesn't like to be cruel,--and yet one hates to lie
One that goes in a nurse may come out an angel
One very sad thing in old friendships
Open patches where the sun gets in and goes to sleep
Oracle
Original, though you have uttered it a hundred times
Ought to produce insanity in every well-regulated mind
Our brains are seventy-year clocks
Overrate their own flesh and blood
Painted there by reflection from our faces
Passion never laughs
People in the green stage of millionism
People that make puns are like wanton boys
Person is really full of information, and does not abuse it
Personal incidents that call up single sharp pictures
Physical necessity to talk out what is in the mind
Plagiarism
Pluck survives stamina
Poem must be kept and used, like a meersehaum, or a violin
Poetry of words is quite as beautiful as that of sentences
Poetry, instead of making one other heart happy
Poor creature that does not often repeat himself
Poverty is evidence of limited capacity
Power of human beings is a very strictly limited agency
Power of music
Pride, in the sense of contemning others
Probabilities
Project a principle full in the face of obvious fact!
Provincial conceit, which some of us must plead guilty to.
Pun is primƒ facie an insult
Put coppers on the railroad-tracks
Qu'est ce qu'il a fait?  What has he done?
Racing horses are essentially gambling implements
Rapidity with which ideas grow old in our memories
Rather longer than usual dressing that morning
Rather meet three of the scowlers than one of the smilers.
Regained my freedom with a sigh
Religious mental disturbances
Remarkably intelligent audience
Remarks like so many postage-stamps
Returning thanks after a dinner of many courses
Ribbon which has strangled so many false pretensions
Sad thing to be born a sneaking fellow
Saddle-leather is in some respects even preferable
Saturation-point of each mind differs from that of every other
Scientific certainty has no spring in it
Scientific knowledge
Second story projecting
See if the ripe fruit were better or worse
Self-assertion, such as free suffrage introduces
Self-made men?
Self-unconsciousness of genius
Sense of SMELL
"Settler" in the form of a fact or a revolver
Several false premises
Shake the same bough again
She who nips off the end of a brittle courtesy
SIN has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all
Six persons engaged in every dialogue between two
Small potatoes always get to the bottom.
Smiling at present follies
So much must be pardoned to humanity
So much woman in it,--muliebrity, as well as femineity
Society is a strong solution of books
Society of Mutual Admiration
Sold his sensibilities
Somebody had been calling him an old man
Something better than flowers; it is a seed-capsule
Something she is ashamed of, or ought to be.
Somewhere,-- somewhere,--love is in store for them
Stages of life
Stupidity often saves a man from going mad
Style is the man
Sudden conviction that I had seen it somewhere
Talk about those subjects you have had long in your mind
Talkers who have what may be called jerky minds
Talking is like playing on the harp
Talking is one of the fine arts
Talking shapes our thoughts for us
Talking with a dull friend affords great relief
Tears that we weep inwardly with unchanging features
Temptation of money and fame is too great for young people
Tepid and unstimulating expression of enthusiasm
Terrible smile
Thanklessness of critical honesty
That great procession of the UNLOVED
The Amen! of Nature is always a flower
The house is quite as much the body we live in
The race that shortens its weapons lengthens its boundaries
The schoolmistress had tried life, too
The way to argue down a vice is not to tell lies about it
The year eighteen hundred and ever-so-few
Their business is not a matter of sympathy, but of intellect
There is a higher law in grammar, not to be put down
There is almost always at least one key to this side-door
There is no elasticity in a mathematical fact
Think of the griefs that die unspoken!
Think only in single file front this day forward
Third vowel as its center
This is one of those cases in which the style is the man
This is the shortest way,--she said
Those who ask your opinion really want your praise
Time is a fact
To pay up, to own up, and to shut up, if beaten
To trifle with the vocabulary
Too late!---- "It might have been."----Amen!
Travellers change their guineas, but not their characters
Triumph of the ciphering hand-organ
True state of creative genius is allied to reverie, or dreaming
Truth must roll, or nobody can do anything with it
Truth's  sharp corners get terribly rounded
Truths a man carries about with him are his tools
Turn over any old falsehood
Unadorned and in plain calico
Undertakers
Unpacks and unfolds incidental illustrations
Unpretending mediocrity is good
Virtually old when it first makes its appearance
Virtue passed through the hem of their parchment
Virtues of a sporting man
Vulgarism of language
Wait awhile!
Walls of that larger Inquisition which we call Civilization
Want of ideas, want of words, want of manners
We always compare ourselves with our contemporaries.
We are all theological students
We carry happiness into our condition
We die out of houses, just as we die out of our bodies
We don't read what we don't like
We never tell our secrets to people that pump for them.
Wedded, faded away, threw themselves away
Wedding-ring conveys a right to a key to this side-door
Weeded their circle pretty well of these unfortunates
What a satire, by the way, is that machine
What are the great faults of conversation?
Whether anything can be conscious of its own flavor??
Whether gifted with the accident of beauty or not
While she is silent, Nature is working for her
Who is in advance of it or even with it
Wholesale professional dealers in misfortune
Why authors and actors are ashamed of being funny?
Why did I not ask? you will say
Will you take the long path with me?
Winning-post a slab of white or gray stone
Wit knows that his place is at the tail of a procession.
Wonder how my great trees are coming on this summer.
World calls him hard names, probably
World has a million roosts for a man, but only one nest.
Yes, I am a man, like another
Youth and age--something in the soul





THE PROFESSOR AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
[Etext #2665] prabt10.txt or prabt10.zip

Anonymous defamation, putting lies into people's mouths
Answer him not
Apologizing --A very desperate habit
Apology is only egotism wrong side out
Celibacy of the clergy
Chose a plain one, that keeps good time, and that is all
Consolations of religion
Conversational non-combatants
Didn't know Truth was such an invalid
Essence of genius is truthfulness, contact with realities
Faith dislikes being meddled with
Fear of open discussion implies feebleness
Genius
Good many coarse people in both callings
Happy to agree with all their beliefs, if that were possible
Hardness in surgeons, just as there is in theologians
Hating ourselves as we hate our neighbors
Humility is the first of the virtues--for other people
I can't afford to pay quite so much as that even for peace
I will not die with a lie rattling in my throat
Inclination of two persons with a strong affinity
Intellectual non-combatant
It is so hard to prove a negative
Let him be patient with an opinion he does not accept
Life becomes to them as death and death as life
List of things that everybody says and nobody thinks
List of things that everybody thinks and nobobody says
Lurch to quackery, owing to their very loose way of evidence
Meddling with things that can take care of themselves
Most persons have died before they expire
No company of craftsmen that did not need sharp looking after
Nobody talks much that does n't say unwise things
Not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth
Notion of private property in truth
Only condition of peace in this world is to have no ideas
Opinions
Out of plumb when they sit side by side
Overestimate of our special individuality
Pathological piety
Perpetual insult to mediocrity
Plenty of praying rogues and swearing saints in the world
Presumption in favor of any particular belief
Pseudo-science
Question everything
Saying one thing about it and believing another
Spiritualism
Surfeits of pathological piety
Talk, to me, is only spading up the ground for crops of thought
Talked as if I believed what I said
The dead-living
Took it for granted that he and his crowd were right
Torturing of dying people
Truth is tough.  It will not break, like a bubble
Truth never goeth without a scratcht face
Way the pseudo-sciences go to work
Wholesale moral arrangements are so different from retail
Whoso offers me any article of belief for my signature
Wider the intellect, the larger and simpler the expressions
Wisdom is the abstract of the past
Woman fascinates a man quite as often by what she overlooks
Would you stand still in fly-time, or would you give a kick





THE POET AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE
[Etext #2666] ptabt10.txt or ptabt10.zip

Age magnifies and aggravates persons out of due proportion
Allowed a set of monks to pull their hoods over our eyes
Associates facts by their accidental cohesion
Authority
Dogmatists
Don't like the word tolerant
Earnest
Emptied me of all my voluntary laughter
Enthusiasm for something that makes a life worth looking at
Enthusiast
Epicure in words
Ever-ending and ever-beginning stories
Fore-stick and the back-log of ancient days
How does she go to work to help you?  -- Why, she listens
I talk half the time to find out my own thoughts
If he knows anything, knows how little he knows
Intellectual myopia
Inventory of my faculties as calmly as if I were an appraiser
It is a woman's business to please
Knowledge--it excites prejudices to call it science
Life is a fatal complaint
Minds tossing on the unquiet waves of doubt
More science he has the worse for his patient
Most of us hope and many of us believe we shall
Must not roughly smash other people's idols
Never saw the man that couldn't teach me something
Pedantry, triviality, and the kind of partial blindness
Poetry is not an article of prime necessity, and potatoes are
Poets who never write verses
Privilege of wisdom to listen
Province of knowledge to speak
Question these charming old people before it is too late
Rather too anxious that I should be comfortable
Rounded back, convex with years of stooping over his minute work
Said something which another had often felt but never said
Satisfaction to the curious practitioner
Science without common sense
Scientific specialization
"Sentimentality," which is sentiment overdone
She always laughs and cries in the right places
Some people that think everything pitiable is so funny
Takes very little to spoil everything for writer, talker, lover
There is nothing I do not question
Two sides to everybody, as there are to that piece of money
Vacuous countenances
Virtues of her deceased spouse
We never need fear that he will undervalue himself
What have I to do with time, but to fill it up with labor?
What you hate in him is chiefly misfortune
Wholesale thinker who handles knowledge by the cargo
Young surgeon, old physician





OVER THE TEACUPS
[Etext #2689] teacp10.txt or teacp10.zip

Acquiescence is the best of palliations
All of our brains squint more or less
Alternations of overvaluation and undervaluation of ourselves
At sixty we come "within range of the rifle-pits
Blessed are those who have said our good things for us
Cavil on the ninth part of a hair
Cerebral strabismus
Childishness to expect men to believe as their fathers did
Consciousness is covered by layers of habitual thoughts
Content to remain more or less ignorant of many things
Controversialists
Cracked Teacup
Cultivated symptoms as other people cultivate roses
Curve of health
Difference in the extreme limits of life--little
Do not be bullied out of your common sense by the specialist
Do wish she would get well--or something
Endure philosophically what we cannot help
Enormous appetite for Old World titles of distinction
Envy not the old man the tranquillity of his existence
Every age has to shape the Divine image it worships over again
General practitioner submits to a servitude
Great privilege of old age was the getting rid of responsibility
Habits are the crutches of old age
He did not know so much about old age then as he does now
Hoard your life as a miser hoards his money
Homo unius libri--the man of one book
Hypocrisy of kind-hearted people
I dressed his wound, and God cured him
I told you so
Intellectual Over-Feeding and its consequence, Mental Dyspepsia
It is time to be old,  To take in sail
Know enough of a wide range of subjects
Know something about everything, and everything about something
Less you think about your health the better
Man who knows too much about one particular subject
Nature's kindly anodyne
Never contradict a man with a squinting brain
Never to countenance a wrong because others did
No patience with any form of deceit or duplicity
Old Men's Tears
Old people have a right to be epicures, if they can afford it
Old women of both sexes
Outlived their usefulness
Persons with a strong instinctive tendency to contradiction
Pitying kindness
Pleasure to mediocrity to have its superiors brought in range
Presumptions
Rapture of self-admiration
Reached and passed the natural limit of serviceable years
Remember past happiness in the hour of misery
Sentenced to capital punishment for the crime of living
Squinting brains
Sufficient, not too much exercise
Tobacco, a soothing drug
Trespasser on the domain belonging to another generation
Truth is lost in its own excess
Unconscious plagiarism
Vieille fille fait jeune mariee
Voice that makes friends of everybody
Wants nothing but a bald spot and a wife
We must drop much of our foliage before winter is upon us
Weak-eyed fountain feebly weeping over its own insignificance
When one watches for symptoms, every organ in the body is ready
When we think we are thinking
With an effort that we admit a new author into the inner circle
World was a garden to me then; it is a churchyard now
Writer telling them something they have long known or felt
Young Doctor, waiting for his bald spot to come





ELSIE VENNER
[Etext #2696] elsie10.txt or elsie10.zip

All of us are more or less imaginative in our theology
Appetite should be at war with no other purse than his own
Attacks of spiritual neuralgia
Bare hook and a coarse line are all that is needed
Be polite and generous, but don't undervalue yourself
Beliefs must be lived in for a good while
Confession of weakness which does not wish to be strong
Conscience itself requires a conscience
Constituency of mediocrities of which the world is made up
Cowardice may call for our most lenient judgment
Criticise other people's modes of dealing with their children
Despair itself would have been like an anodyne
Don't begin to pry till you have got the long arm on your side
Educational factory
Fall silent and think they are thinking
Habits, which take the place of self-determination
Happiest of souls, if lethargy is bliss
He almost lived in his library
I dressed his wound and God healed him
Judged the hearts of others by his own
Leverage is everything
Makes men imperious to sit a horse
Matrimonial alliance, and a family of half a dozen children
Means at least as much as he says
Measles  Mumps  And Sin,--that's always catching
Millstone round their necks, taking it for a life-preserver?
Mistake spiritual selfishness for sanctity
Not quite dead enough to bury
Old Doctor did not believe in medicine
One angry man is as good as another
One of her "I think it's sos" is worth the Bible-oath
Outside observers see results; parents see processes
Passive endurance is the hardest trial
Priests that had no wives and no children, or none to speak of
Shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy
Slow to accept marvellous stories and many forms of superstition
So long as a woman can talk, there is nothing she cannot bear
Some people think that truth and gold are always to be washed for
Swap him for a `yallah dog,'--and then shoot the dog
Talked cautiously, feeling his way for sympathy
Taste of everything he carried in his saddlebags
Thin film of some emotional non-conductor between them
Treat bad men exactly as if they were insane
Tremulous movement of the muscles, which was worse than silence
We forget that weakness is not in itself a sin
We must have headway on, or there will be no piloting her
What a miserable thing