 it is to be poor
Why did n't I warn him about love and all that nonsense?
Widow Rowens was now in the full bloom of ornamental sorrow





THE GUARDIAN ANGEL
[Etext #2697] angel10.txt or angel10.zip

Alas!  her simple words were true,--he had grown away from her
Been afraid since to like almost anything
Cold shower-bath the world furnishes gratis
Conflicting advice of all manner of officious friends
Don't be in a hurry to choose your friends
Dreaded mingling with the brawlers of the market-place
Easy-crying widows take new husbands soonest
Getting married is jumping overboard
Grief must be fed with thought, or starve to death
Her only fault was that she had not grown with him
I am old and incombustible enough to be trusted
"I cannot help it"--the hysteric motto
Knew how to keep his knowledge to himself upon occasion
Library gathered like his is a looking-glass
Live folks are only dead folks warmed over
Love does not thrive without hope
Mechanical plodders and the indifferent routinists
Most pathetic image in the world to many women - own tears
Not handicapped with any burdensome ideals
Nothing so humble that taste cannot be shown in it
Patronized, which is not a pleasant feeling
Picket-guard at the extreme outpost
Saint may be a sinner that never got down to "hard pan"
Talk without words is half their conversation
Truth is only safe when diluted
Turning bread and milk into the substance of little sinners
War--Organized barbarism





A MORTAL ANTIPATHY
[Etext #2698] antip10.txt or antip10.zip

Beginners are very apt to make what they think are discoveries
Charlatanism always hobbles on two crutches
Doctor's wife must keep her tongue in
Dying, whose eyes may light up, but rarely shed a tear
Knows everything and doesn't believe anything
Lecturing to instruct myself
Lucky mishaps, or, more elegantly, fortunate calamities
Man who knows what is in books - and what is in men
Medicine deals chiefly in probabilities
Nervous revolutions
Never know the extent of darkness until it is partially illuminated
Others took assertions on trust
Perhaps I sha'n't believe in medicine enough to practise it
Persons who never are young--and never old
Physicians, of all men in the world, know how to wait
Sagacity without which learning is a mere incumbrance
Self-indulging and self-commiserating emotionalism
Self-love is a cup without any bottom
Shut out, not all light, but all the light they do not want
Struggle with the ever-rising mists of delusion
Tender spot of one or the other is carelessly handled
Theological students developed a third eyelid
What has the public to do with my private affairs
When gratitude is a bankrupt, love only can pay his debts





PASSAGES FROM AN OLD VOLUME OF LIFE
[Etext #2706] pages10.txt or pages10.zip

Accustomed to tread carefully among the parts of speech
Are a dozen additional spasms worth living for?
Fiat voluntas MEA,--let my will be done
Grief borne as men bear it, felt as women feel it
Guides have queer notions occasionally
He smiled an official smile
Ill health gives a certain common character to all faces
It was suggested that it might shorten life
Locomotive intoxication
Man is essentially an idolater
New discomfort in place of an old comfort is often a luxury
Officials become brutalized, I suppose, as a matter of course
Patients are not the property of their physicians
Philanthropists are commonly grave, occasionally grim
Prediction seems to stand in need of an extension
Prophecies
Prophesy as much as you like, but always hedge
Teach the ignorance of what people do not want to know
Timid compromisers
We are all egotists in sickness and debility
Weakness had made him querulous





MEDICAL ESSAYS
[Etext #2700] medic10.txt or medic10.zip

A man's ignorance is his private property
Affectation vital to the well-being of society
All these medications are, prima facie, injurious
All they want is to be let alone
An analogy is not an explanation
Argumentum ad ignorantiam
Assuming a falsehood as a fact, and giving reasons for it
At any rate it can do no harm
Bedside is always the true centre of medical teaching
Beliefs are rooted in human wants and weakness, and die hard
Better for mankind,--and all the worse for the fishes
Bewitching cup of self-quackery
C'est magnifique, mais ce n'est pas la guerre
Coincidences
Colossal system of self-deception
Community is still overdosed
Confound belief with evidence
Congenital incapacity for life
Count the pulse; also note the time of day
Counting only their favorable cases
Cut all their throats, sweetly
Diseases get well without being "cured,"
Dislike whatever shakes the dust out of their traditions
Drugs should always be regarded as evils
Dullest of teachers is the one who does not know what to omit
Earned your money by the dose you have taken
Exception of opium, wine, specifics, and anaesthetics
Express your opinions freely; defend them rarely
Extra price for gilding his rich patients' pills
Extravagance in remedies and trust in remedies
False appetite in many intelligences
Fearless in the face of authority
Find most of the old beliefs alive amongst us to-day
Flippant loquacity of half knowledge
Follies and inanities, imposing on the credulous
Futility of attempting to silence this asserted science
Generalize the disease and individualize the patient
Half knowledge dreads nothing but whole knowledge
Half-censure divided between the parties
I am too much in earnest for either humility or vanity
Ignorance is a solemn and sacred fact
Imperative demand of patients and their friends
Invectives against such as dared to doubt the dogmas
Kept extreme remedies for extreme cases
Logical errors
Loud outcry on a slight touch reveals the weak spot
Medical Jounals must find something to fill their columns
Medical logic which does not seem to have been taught
Medicines proper, which hurts a well man, hurts a sick one
Much as you know, something is still left for you to learn
Mutual respect of which outward courtesy is the sign
Natural incapacity for sound observation
No families take so little medicine as those of doctors
None of my business to inquire what other persons think
One whose patients are willing to die in his hands
Opium, which the Creator himself seems to prescribe
Over-medication are to a great extent masked by disease
Pegs to hang facts upon
Physician and the disease entered, hand in hand
Point of mental saturation
Post hoc ergo propter hoc error
Presumption in favor of poisoning
Presumption is always against treatments
Pretensions of presumptuous ignorance
Pseudological inanity
Public itself, which insists on being poisoned
Quackery and idolatry are all but immortal
Qui a bu, boira
Rapid rotation of scientific crops
Save all our old treasures of knowledge and mine deeply for new
Sick must have somewhat wherewith to busy their thoughts
Single combats between dead authors and living housemaids
Singular inability to weigh the value of testimony
Special gift of the man born for a teacher
Student must not be led away by the seduction of knowledge
Sweeping statistical documents
Take down your sign, or never put it up
The withered branch of science: medicine
They are not well if they do not have them
Time is a very elastic element in Geology and Prophecy
True meaning of the word "cure"
Trust more in nature and less in their plans of interference
Ubi tres medici, duo athei
Vast community of quacks, with or without the diploma
Vowed these gifts to the altar, and the gods saved them
Vulgar love of paradox
Where knowledge leaves off and ignorance begins
Whether they had better live at all
Why we teach so much that is not practical
Wise enough to confess the fact of absolute ignorance
Words that few understand and most will shortly forget
Yielding to the tendency to self-delusion
Young man knows the rules, but the old man knows the exceptions





THE ENTIRE GUTENBERG FILES OF HOLMES
[Etext #3252] ohent10.txt or ohent10.zip

A nail will pick a lock that defies hatchet and hammer
A little queer and uncertain in general aspect.
A misprint kills a sensitive author
Absolute, peremptory facts are bullies
Advised every literary man to have a profession.
Afraid of books who have not handled them from infancy
Age and neglect united gradually
Agreed on certain ultimata of belief
Algebraic symbols of minds which have grown too weak
All his geese are swans
All men are bores, except when we want them
All men love all women
All the forms of moral excellence, except truth
All want to reach old age and grumble when they get it
And now we two are walking the long path in peace together
Another privilege of talking is to misquote
Arc in the movement of a large intellect
As I understand truth
As to clever people's hating each other
As a child, he should have tumbled about in a library
Asked Solon what made him dare to be so obstinate
Assume a standard of judgment in our own minds
At the mercy of every superior mind
Audacious self-esteem, with good ground for it
Automatic and involuntary actions of the mind
Babbage's calculating machine
Be very careful to whom you trust one of these keys
Beautiful effects from wit,--all the prismatic colors
Been in the same precise circumstances before
Behave like men and gentlemen about it, if you know how.
Beliefs are rooted in human wants and weakness, and die hard
Bells which small trades-people connect with their shop-doors
Better for mankind,--and all the worse for the fishes
Better too few words, from the woman we love
Bewitching cup of self-quackery
Bill which will render pockets a superfluity in your next suit
Blank checks of intellectual bankruptcy
Bowing and nodding over the music
Brain often runs away with the heart's best blood
Brilliant flashes--of silence!
Brute beasts of the intellectual domain
Bury in it beliefs, doubts, dreams, hopes, and terrors
But we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.
But it was in talking of Life that we came most nearly together
C'est le DERNIER pas qui co–te
Called an old man for the first time
Character is distinctly shown at the age of four months.
Cigar
Clairvoyance which sees into things without opening them
Code of finalities is a necessary condition of profitable talk
Cold shower-bath the world furnishes gratis
Comfort is essential to enjoyment
Commerce is just putting his granite foot upon them
Common sense, as you understand it.
Common sense was good enough for him
Compare the racer with the trotter
Conceit is just a natural thing to human minds
Conceit has the virtue of making them cheerful
Conclusion that he or she is really dull
Conflicting advice of all manner of officious friends
Consciousness of carrying a "settler" in the form of a fact
Controversy
Conversation which is suggestive rather than argumentative
Conversational fungi spring up most luxuriantly
Conversational bully
Conversational blank checks or counters
Conversational soprano
Creative action is not voluntary at all
Crippled souls
Crow with a king-bird after him
Cut your climate to your constitution
Dangerous subjects
Demand for intellectual labor is so enormous
Did I believe in love at first sight?
Didn't know Truth was such an invalid
Differ on the fundamental principles
Dishwater from the washings of English dandyism
Disputing about remainders and fractions
Do wish she would get well--or something
Do you know how important good jockeying is to authors?
Do you ever wonder why poets talk so much about flowers?
Do not be bullied out of your common sense by the specialist
Don't make your moral staple consist of the negative virtues
Don't believe any man ever talked like that in this world
Don't begin to pry till you have got the long arm on your side
Don't ever think the poetry is dead in an old man
Don't be in a hurry to choose your friends
Doomed to the pangs of an undeceived self-estimate
Dullest of teachers is the one who does not know what to omit
Dulness is not commonly a game fish
Earned your money by the dose you have taken
Easier to dispute it than to disprove it
Easier to say this than to prove it
Educational factory
Elysian abandonment of a huge recumbent chair.
Every person's feelings have a front-door and a side-door
Extra talent does sometimes make people jealous
Facts always yield the place of honor, in conversation
Fall silent and think they are thinking
Few, if any, were ruined by drinking
Flash terms for words which truly characterize their objects.
Fortune is the measure of intelligence
Fortune had left her, sorrow had baptized her
Friendship authorizes you to say disagreeable things
Gambling with dice or stocks
Gambling, on the great scale, is not republican
Generalize the disease and individualize the patient
Generally ruined before they became drunkards
Genius in an essentially common person is detestable
Gift of seeing themselves in the true light
Give it an intellectual shake and hold it up to the light
Give us the luxuries of life
Good for nothing until they have been long kept and used
Good feeling helps society to make liars of most of us
Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris
Got his hand up, as a pointer lifts his forefoot
Governed, not by, but according to laws
Grave without a stone where nothing but a man is buried
Great silent-moving misery puts a new stamp on us
Grow we must, if we outgrow all that we love
Grow old early, if you would be old long
Habit is a labor-saving invention
Habits are the crutches of old age
Half knowledge dreads nothing but whole knowledge
Half-censure divided between the parties
Hard it is for some people to get out of a room
He did not know so much about old age then as he does now
He that has once done you a kindness
He who is carried by horses must deal with rogues
Height of art to conceal art
Her breathing was somewhat hurried and high, or thoracic
Here lies buried the soul of the licentiate Pedro Garcias
Hire logic, in the shape of a lawyer
Hold their outspread hands over your head
Holes in all her pockets
Hoped he did deserve a little abuse occasionally
Hopelessly dull discourse acts inductively
How long will school-keeping take to kill you?
Hung with moss, looking like bearded Druids
Hydrostatic paradox of controversy
I always believed in life rather than in books
I always break down when folks cry in my face
I allow no "facts " at this table
I show my thought, another his
I tell my secrets too easily when I am downhearted.
I love horses
I think I have not been attacked enough for it
I never think I have hit hard unless it rebounds
I replied with my usual forbearance
I am my own son, as it seems to me
I had not thought love was ever meant for me.
I hate books
I have lived by the sea-shore and by the mountains
I have taken all knowledge to be my province
If so and so, we should have been this or that
If they have run as well as they knew how!
If I thought I should ever see the Alps!
Il faut ne pas BRUTALISER la machine
In what direction we are moving
Incipit Allegoria Senectutis.
Infinite ocean of similitudes and analogies
Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked
Insanity
Intellectual companions can be found easily
Is this the mighty occan?--is this all?
It is by little things that we know ourselves
It is pleasant to be foolish at the right time
Judge men's minds by comparing with mine
Keep his wit in the background
Key to this side-door
Knowledge and timber only useful when seasoned
La main de fer sous le gant de velours
Laid the egg of the Reformation which Luther hatched
Laughs at times at the grand airs "Science" puts on
Law of the road with regard to handsome faces
Leading a string of my mind's daughters to market
Leap at a single bound into celebrity
Learn anything twice as easily as in my earlier days
Leave your friend to learn unpleasant truths from his enemies
Lecturer is public property
Let us cry!
Liability of all men to be elected to public office
Life would be nothing without paper-credit
Life is maintained by the respiration of oxygen and of sentiment
Like taking the cat in your lap after holding a squirrel
Listen to what others say about subjects you have studied
Little great man
Little muscle which knows its importance
Little narrow streaks of specialized knowledge
Live on the reputation of the reputation they might have made
Living in a narrow world of dry habits
Logic
Logicians carry the surveyor's chain over the track
Long illness is the real vampyrism
Look through the silvered rings of the arcus senilis!
Love must be either rich or rosy
Love is sparingly soluble in the words of men
Love-capacity is a congenital endowment
Lying is unprofitable
Made up your mind to do when you ask them for advice
Man of family
Man who means to be honest for a literary pickpocket
Man is father to the boy that was
Man's and a woman's dusting a library
Man's first life-story shall clean him out, so to speak
Mathematical fact
May doubt everything to-day if I will only do it civilly
Meaningless blushing
Mechanical invention had exhausted itself
Memory is a net
Men that know everything except how to make a living
Men grow sweet a little while before they begin to decay
Men of facts wait their turn in grim silence
Men who have found new occupations when growing old
Men that it weakens one to talk with an hour
Men are fools, cowards, and liars all at once
Might have hired an EARTHQUAKE for less money!
Moralist and occasional sermonizer
Most of our common, working beliefs are probabilities
Moved as if all her articulations were elbow-joints
Much ashamed of some people for retaining their reason
Must not read such a string of verses too literally
Must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it
Must be weaned from his late suppers now
Napoleon's test
Nature dresses and undresses them
Nature, who always has her pockets full of seeds
Nearest approach to flying that man has ever made
Neither make too much of flaws or overstatements
Never forget where they have put their money
No families take so little medicine as those of doctors
No fresh truth ever gets into a book
No man knows his own voice
Nobody is so old he doesn't think he can live a year
None of my business to inquire what other persons think
Nutritious diet of active sympathetic benevolence
Oblivion as residuary legatee
Oblivion's Uncatalogued Library
Odious trick of speech or manners must be got rid of.
Oh, so patient she is, this imperturbable Nature!
Old Age
Old age appear as a series of personal insults and indignities
Old jokes are dynamometers of mental tension
One very sad thing in old friendships
One whose patients are willing to die in his hands
One doesn't like to be cruel,--and yet one hates to lie
One that goes in a nurse may come out an angel
One can generally tell these wholesale thieves easily enough
Open patches where the sun gets in and goes to sleep
Oracle
Original, though you have uttered it a hundred times
Ought to produce insanity in every well-regulated mind
Our brains are seventy-year clocks
Overrate their own flesh and blood
Painted there by reflection from our faces
Passion never laughs
People in the green stage of millionism
People that make puns are like wanton boys
Person is really full of information, and does not abuse it
Personal incidents that call up single sharp pictures
Physical necessity to talk out what is in the mind
Picket-guard at the extreme outpost
Plagiarism
Pluck survives stamina
Poem must be kept and used, like a meersehaum, or a violin
Poetry, instead of making one other heart happy
Poetry of words is quite as beautiful as that of sentences
Poor creature that does not often repeat himself
Poverty is evidence of limited capacity
Power of human beings is a very strictly limited agency
Power of music
Pretensions of presumptuous ignorance
Pride, in the sense of contemning others
Probabilities
Project a principle full in the face of obvious fact!
Provincial conceit, which some of us must plead guilty to.
Pseudo-science
Pseudological inanity
Public itself, which insists on being poisoned
Pun is primƒ facie an insult
Put coppers on the railroad-tracks
Qu'est ce qu'il a fait?  What has he done?
Quackery and idolatry are all but immortal
Question everything
Racing horses are essentially gambling implements
Rapidity with which ideas grow old in our memories
Rather meet three of the scowlers than one of the smilers.
Rather longer than usual dressing that morning
Regained my freedom with a sigh
Religious mental disturbances
Remarkably intelligent audience
Remarks like so many postage-stamps
Returning thanks after a dinner of many courses
Ribbon which has strangled so many false pretensions
Sad thing to be born a sneaking fellow
Saddle-leather is in some respects even preferable
Saint may be a sinner that never got down to "hard pan"
Saturation-point of each mind differs from that of every other
Saying one thing about it and believing another
Scientific certainty has no spring in it
Scientific knowledge
Second story projecting
See if the ripe fruit were better or worse
Self-assertion, such as free suffrage introduces
Self-love is a cup without any bottom
Self-made men?
Self-unconsciousness of genius
Sense of SMELL
Sentenced to capital punishment for the crime of living
"Sentimentality," which is sentiment overdone
"Settler" in the form of a fact or a revolver
Several false premises
Shake the same bough again
She who nips off the end of a brittle courtesy
She always laughs and cries in the right places
Shut out, not all light, but all the light they do not want
Shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy
SIN has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all
Single combats between dead authors and living housemaids
Singular inability to weigh the value of testimony
Six persons engaged in every dialogue between two
Slow to accept marvellous stories and many forms of superstition
Small potatoes always get to the bottom.
Smiling at present follies
So long as a woman can talk, there is nothing she cannot bear
So much woman in it,--muliebrity, as well as femineity
So much must be pardoned to humanity
Society is a strong solution of books
Society of Mutual Admiration
Sold his sensibilities
Some people that think everything pitiable is so funny
Some people think that truth and gold are always to be washed for
Somebody had been calling him an old man
Something she is ashamed of, or ought to be
Something better than flowers; it is a seed-capsule
Somewhere,-- somewhere,--love is in store for them
Stages of life
Struggle with the ever-rising mists of delusion
Stupidity often saves a man from going mad
Style is the man
Sudden conviction that I had seen it somewhere
Takes very little to spoil everything for writer, talker, lover
Talk about those subjects you have had long in your mind
Talk, to me, is only spading up the ground for crops of thought
Talk without words is half their conversation
Talkers who have what may be called jerky minds
Talking with a dull friend affords great relief
Talking is like playing on the harp
Talking is one of the fine arts
Talking shapes our thoughts for us
Tears that we weep inwardly with unchanging features
Temptation of money and fame is too great for young people
Tepid and unstimulating expression of enthusiasm
Terrible smile
Thanklessness of critical honesty
That great procession of the UNLOVED
The house is quite as much the body we live in
The schoolmistress had tried life, too
The Amen! of Nature is always a flower
The race that shortens its weapons lengthens its boundaries
The year eighteen hundred and ever-so-few
The way to argue down a vice is not to tell lies about it
Their business is not a matter of sympathy, but of intellect
There is no elasticity in a mathematical fact
There is a higher law in grammar, not to be put down
There is almost always at least one key to this side-door
Think only in single file front this day forward
Think of the griefs that die unspoken!
Third vowel as its center
This is the shortest way,--she said
This is one of those cases in which the style is the man
Those who ask your opinion really want your praise
Time is a fact
To trifle with the vocabulary
To pay up, to own up, and to shut up, if beaten
Too late!---- "It might have been."----Amen!
Travellers change their guineas, but not their characters
Triumph of the ciphering hand-organ
True state of creative genius is allied to reverie, or dreaming
Truth must roll, or nobody can do anything with it
Truth is only safe when diluted
Truth's  sharp corners get terribly rounded
Truths a man carries about with him are his tools
Turn over any old falsehood
Unadorned and in plain calico
Undertakers
Unpacks and unfolds incidental illustrations
Unpretending mediocrity is good
Virtually old when it first makes its appearance
Virtue passed through the hem of their parchment
Virtues of a sporting man
Vulgarism of language
Wait awhile!
Walls of that larger Inquisition which we call Civilization
Want of ideas, want of words, want of manners
We die out of houses, just as we die out of our bodies
We always compare ourselves with our contemporaries.
We are all theological students
We carry happiness into our condition
We don't read what we don't like
We never tell our secrets to people that pump for them.
Wedded, faded away, threw themselves away
Wedding-ring conveys a right to a key to this side-door
Weeded their circle pretty well of these unfortunates
What a satire, by the way, is that machine
What are the great faults of conversation?
Whether anything can be conscious of its own flavor??
Whether gifted with the accident of beauty or not
While she is silent, Nature is working for her
Who is in advance of it or even with it
Wholesale professional dealers in misfortune
Why authors and actors are ashamed of being funny?
Why did I not ask? you will say
Will you take the long path with me?
Winning-post a slab of white or gray stone
Wit knows that his place is at the tail of a procession.
Wonder how my great trees are coming on this summer.
World calls him hard names, probably
World has a million roosts for a man, but only one nest.
Yes, I am a man, like another
Young man knows the rules, but the old man knows the exceptions
Youth and age--something in the soul




[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>





WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS

FROM THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EDITION
OF THE WORKS OF WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS




THESE BOOKS OF WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS
ARE PRESENTLY LISTED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG:

STUDIES:
     Henry James, Jr.
     The Man of Letters as a Man of Business
     A Psychological Counter-current in Recent Fiction. 
     Emile Zola 
     Literary Friends and Acquaintances
          Biographical
          My First Visit to New England
          First Impressions of Literary New York
          Roundabout to Boston
          Literary Boston As I Knew It
          Oliver Wendell Holmes
          The White Mr. Longfellow
          Studies of Lowell
          Cambridge Neighbors
          A Belated Guest
          My Mark Twain

     Literature and Life
          Man of Letters in Business
          Confessions of a Summer Colonist
          The Young Contributor
          Last Days in a Dutch Hotel
          Anomalies of the Short Story
          Spanish Prisoners of War
          American Literary Centers
          Standard Household Effect Co.
          Notes of a Vanished Summer
          Worries of a Winter Walk
          Summer Isles of Eden
          Wild Flowers of the Asphalt
          A Circus in the Suburbs
          A She Hamlet
          The Midnight Platoon
          The Beach at Rockaway
          Sawdust in the Arena
          At a Dime Museum
          American Literature in Exile
          The Horse Show
          The Problem of the Summer
          Aesthetic New York Fifty-odd Years Ago
          From New York into New England
          The Art of the Adsmith
          The Psychology of Plagiarism
          Puritanism in American Fiction
          The What and How in Art
          Politics in American Authors
          Storage
          "Floating down the River on the O-hi-o"

     My Literary Passions
          The Bookcase at Home
          Goldsmith
          Cervantes
          Irving
          First Fiction and Drama
          Longfellow's "Spanish Student"
          Scott
          Lighter Fancies
          Pope
          Various Preferences
          Uncle Tom's Cabin
          Ossian
          Shakespeare
          Ik Marvel
          Dickens
          Wordsworth, Lowell, Chaucer
          Macaulay.
          Critics and Reviews.
          A Non-literary Episode
          Thackeray
          "Lazarillo De Tormes"
          Curtis, Longfellow, Schlegel
          Tennyson
          Heine
          De Quincey, Goethe, Longfellow.
          George Eliot, Hawthorne, Goethe, Heine
          Charles Reade
          Dante
          Goldoni, Manzoni, D'azeglio
          "Pastor Fido," "Aminta," "Romola," "Yeast," "Paul Ferroll"
          Erckmann-chatrian, Bjorstjerne Bjornson
          Tourguenief, Auerbach
          Certain Preferences and Experiences
          Valdes, Galdos, Verga, Zola, Trollope, Hardy
          Tolstoy
     
     Criticism and Fiction

NOVELS:
     The Rise of Silas Lapham
     An Open-eyed Conspiracy--an Idyl of Saratoga
     The Landlord at Lions Head, v1
     The Landlord at Lions Head, v2
     Their Wedding Journey
          The Outset
          A Midsummer-day's Dream
          The Night Boat
          A Day's Railroading
          The Enchanted City, and Beyond
          Niagara
          Down the St. Lawrence
          The Sentiment of Montreal
          Homeward and Home
          Niagara Revisited Twelve Years after Their Wedding
     A Hazard of New Fortunes
          Part 1
          Part 2
          Part 3
          Part 4
          Part 5
     Their Silver Wedding Journey
          Volume 1
          Volume 2
          Volume 3
     Dr. Breen's Practice
     Fennel and Rue,
     The Kentons
     Ragged Lady, v1
     Ragged Lady, v2
     April Hopes

PLAYS:    
     The Sleeping-Car
     The Garotters
     The Elevator
     The Parlor-Car
     The Register





QUOTATIONS HAVE BEEN TAKEN FROM THE FOLLOWING FILES:

Sep 2002 Ragged Lady, V2, by William Dean Howells   [WH#52][wh2rl10.txt]3406

Sep 2002 Ragged Lady, V1, by William Dean Howells   [WH#51][wh1rl10.txt]3405

Sep 2002 April Hopes, by William Dean Howells       [WH#50][whapr10.txt]3404

Aug 2002 Entire PG Edition Of William Dean Howells  [WH#47][whewk10.txt]3400

Aug 2002 Of Literature--Entire,  by W. D. Howells   [WH#46][whlfr10.txt]3399

Aug 2002 First Visit To New England, by W. Howells  [WH#45][whvne10.txt]3398
[Full Title: My First Visit To New England,  by W. D. Howells, 1911]
CONTENTS:
     Bibliographical
     My First Visit To New England
     First Impressions Of Literary New York

Aug 2002 Roundabout To Boston, by W. D. Howells     [WH#44][whrtb10.txt]3397
[Full Title: Roundabout To Boston, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Literary Boston, by William Dean Howells   [WH#43][whbos10.txt]3396
[Full Title: Literary Boston As I Knew It, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Oliver Wendell Holmes, by W. D. Howells    [WH#42][whowh10.txt]3395
[Full Title: Oliver Wendell Holmes, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 The White Mr. Longfellow, by W. Howells    [WH#41][whlng10.txt]3394
[Full Title: The White Mr. Longfellow, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Studies Of Lowell, by William Dean Howells [WH#40][whlow10.txt]3393
[Full Title: Studies Of Lowell, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Cambridge Neighbors, by W. D. Howells      [WH#39][whcbn10.txt]3392
[Full Title: Cambridge Neighbors, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 A Belated Guest, by Willam Dean Howells    [WH#38][whabg10.txt]3391
[Full Title: A Belated Guest, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 My Mark Twain, by Willam Dean Howells      [WH#37][whmmt10.txt]3390
[Full Title: My Mark Twain, by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Complete Literature And Life, by Howells   [WH#36][whlal10.txt]3389
[Full Title: Literature And Life [Studies]  by W. D. Howells, 1911]
CONTENTS:
     Man of Letters in Business
     Confessions of a Summer Colonist
     The Young Contributor
     Last Days in a Dutch Hotel
     Anomalies of the Short Story
     Spanish Prisoners of War
     American Literary Centers
     Standard Household Effect Co.
     Notes of a Vanished Summer
     Worries of a Winter Walk
     Summer Isles of Eden
     Wild Flowers of the Asphalt
     A Circus in the Suburbs
     A She Hamlet
     The Midnight Platoon
     The Beach at Rockaway
     Sawdust in the Arena
     At a Dime Museum
     American Literature in Exile
     The Horse Show
     The Problem of the Summer
     Aesthetic New York Fifty-odd Years Ago
     From New York into New England
     The Art of the Adsmith
     The Psychology of Plagiarism
     Puritanism in American Fiction
     The What and How in Art
     Politics in American Authors
     Storage
     "Floating down the River on the O-hi-o"

Aug 2002 Man Of Letters In Business, by W. Howells  [WH#35][whmlb10.txt]3388
[Full Title: The Man Of Letters As A Man Of Business by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Confessions Of Summer Colonist, by Howells [WH#34][whcsc10.txt]3387
[Full Title: Confessions Of A Summer Colonist  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 The Young Contributor, by W. D. Howells    [WH#33][whtyc10.txt]3386
[Full Title: The Editor's Relations With The Young Contributor by  W. D.
Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Last Days In A Dutch Hotel, by W. Howells  [WH#32][whldh10.txt]3385
[Full Title: Last Days In A Dutch Hotel by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Anomalies Of The Short Story, by Howells   [WH#31][whass10.txt]3384
[Full Title: Some Anomalies Of The Short Story by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Spanish Prisoners Of War, by W. Howells    [WH#30][whspw10.txt]3383
[Full Title: Spanish Prisoners Of War by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 American Literary Centers, by W. Howells   [WH#29][whalc10.txt]3382
[Full Title: American Literary Centers, by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Standard Household Effect Co., by Howells  [WH#28][whshe10.txt]3381
[Full Title: The Standard Household-Effect Company, by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Notes Of A Vanished Summer, by W. Howells  [WH#27][whvan10.txt]3380
[Full Title: Stacatto Notes Of A Vanished Summer, by  W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Short Stories And Essays, by W. Howells    [WH#26][whsse10.txt]3379
[Full Title: Literature And Life [Studies]  W. D. Howells, 1911]
CONTENTS:
     Worries of a Winter Walk
     Summer Isles of Eden
     Wild Flowers of the Asphalt
     A Circus in the Suburbs
     A She Hamlet
     The Midnight Platoon
     The Beach at Rockaway
     Sawdust in the Arena
     At a Dime Museum
     American Literature in Exile
     The Horse Show
     The Problem of the Summer
     Aesthetic New York Fifty-odd Years Ago
     From New York into New England
     The Art of the Adsmith
     The Psychology of Plagiarism
     Puritanism in American Fiction
     The What and How in Art
     Politics in American Authors
     Storage
     "Floating down the River on the O-hi-o"

Aug 2002 My Literary Passions, by W. D. Howells     [WH#25][whmlp10.txt]3378
[Full Title: My Literary Passions/Criticism & Fiction  by W. D. Howells, 1910]

Aug 2002 Criticism and Fiction, by W. D. Howells    [WH#24][whcaf10.txt]3377
[Full Title: My Literary Passions/Criticism & Fiction  by W. D. Howells, 1910]

Aug 2002 The Landlord At Lions Head V2, by Howells  [WH#23][wh2lh10.txt]3376 
Aug 2002 The Landlord At Lions Head V1, by Howells  [WH#22][wh1lh10.txt]3375
[Full Title: The Landlord At Lion's Head by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 The Entire March Family Trilogy, by Howells[WH#21][whemf10.txt]3374
CONTENTS:
     Their Wedding Journey
     A Hazard Of New Fortunes
     Their Silver Wedding Journey

Aug 2002 Silver Wedding Journey V3 by W. D. Howells [WH#20][wh3sw10.txt]3373
[Full Title: Their Silver Wedding Journey, by W. D. Howells, 1900]

Aug 2002 Silver Wedding Journey V2, by W. D. Howells[WH#19][wh2sw10.txt]3372
[Full Title: Their Silver Wedding Journey, by W. D. Howells, 1900]

Aug 2002 Silver Wedding Journey V1, by W. D. Howells[WH#18][wh1sw10.txt]3371
[Full Title: Their Silver Wedding Journey, by W. D. Howells, 1900]

Aug 2002 A Hazard Of New Fortunes V5, by W. Howells [WH#17][wh5nf10.txt]3370
[Full Title: A Hazard Of New Fortunes by W. D. Howells, 1911]


Aug 2002 A Hazard Of New Fortunes V4, by W. Howells [WH#16][wh4nf10.txt]3369
[Full Title: A Hazard Of New Fortunes by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 A Hazard Of New Fortunes V3, by W. Howells [WH#15][wh3nf10.txt]3368
[Full Title: A Hazard Of New Fortunes by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 A Hazard Of New Fortunes V2, by W. Howells [WH#14][wh2nf10.txt]3367
[Full Title: A Hazard Of New Fortunes by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 A Hazard Of New Fortunes V1, by W. Howells [WH#13][wh1nf10.txt]3366
[Full Title: A Hazard Of New Fortunes by W. D. Howells, 1911]

Aug 2002 Their Wedding Journey, by W. D. Howells    [WH#12][whtwj10.txt]3365
[Full Title: Their Wedding Journey, by W. D. Howells, 1895]

Aug 2002 Dr. Breen's Practice, by W. D. Howells     [WH#11][whdbp10.txt]3364
[Full Title: Dr. Breen's Practice, by W. D. Howells, 1881]

Aug 2002 Fennel And Rue, by William Dean Howells    [WH#10][whfar10.txt]3363
[Full Title: Fennel And Rue, by W. D. Howells, 1908]

Aug 2002 The Kentons, by William Dean Howells       [WH#09][whken10.txt]3362
[Full Title: The Kentons, by W. D. Howells, 1902]






                              EDITOR'S NOTE

Readers well acquainted with the works of William Dean Howells
may wish to see if their favorite passages are listed in this
selection.  The etext editor will be glad to add your suggestions.
One of the advantages of internet over paper publication is the ease
of quick revision.

All the titles  may be found using the Project Gutenberg search engine.
After downloading a specific file, the location and complete context of
the quotations  may be found by inserting a small part of the quotation
into the 'Find' or 'Search' functions of the user's word processing
program.

The quotations are in two formats:
     1. Small passages from the text.
     2. A list of alphabetized one-liners.

The editor may be contacted at <widger@cecomet.net> for comments,
questions or suggested additions to these extracts.

D.W.






                           WIDGER'S QUOTATIONS



THE KENTONS
[WH#09][whken10.txt]3362

"Well, that's good," said the young man, and while he talked on she sat
wondering at a nature which all modesty and deference seemed left out of,
though he had sometimes given evidence of his intellectual appreciation
of these things.

She was polite to them all, but to Boyne she was flattering, and he was
too little used to deference from ladies ten years his senior not to be
very sensible of her worth in offering it.

She in turn, to be sure, offered herself a sacrifice to the whims of the
sick girl, whose worst whim was having no wish that could be ascertained,
and who now, after two days of her mother's devotion, was cast upon her
own resources by the inconstant barometer.

It was more difficult for Mrs. Kenton to get rid of the judge, but an
inscrutable frown goes far in such exigencies.





FENNEL AND RUE
[WH#10][whfar10.txt]3363

I used almost to die of hunger for something to happen.

She had downed the hoary superstition that people had too much of a good
time on Christmas to want any good time at all in the week following; and
in acting upon the well-known fact that you never wanted a holiday so
much as the day after you had one, she had made a movement of the highest
social importance.

She added, less sharply: "She couldn't afford to fail, though, at any
point. The fad that fails is extinguished forever. Will these simple
facts do for fiction? Or is it for somebody in real life you're asking,
Mr. Verrian?"





DR. BREEN'S PRACTICE
[WH#11][whdbp10.txt]3364

The neat weather-gray dwellings, shingled to the ground and brightened
with door-yard flowers and creepers, straggled off into the boat-houses
and fishing-huts on the shore, and the village seemed to get afloat at
last in the sloops and schooners riding in the harbor, whose smooth plane
rose higher to the eye than the town itself.

Very probably Dr. Mulbridge would not have recognized himself in the
character of all-compelling lady's-novel hero, which Miss Gleason
imagined for him.

Dr. Mulbridge smiled, as if he perceived her intention not to tell him
something she wished to tell him.

"I believe that if Mrs. Maynard had had the same confidence in me that
she would have had in any man I should not have failed. But every woman
physician has a double disadvantage that I hadn't the strength to
overcome,--her own inexperience and the distrust of other women."





THEIR WEDDING JOURNEY
[WH#12][whtwj10.txt]3365

In the distance on either hand they could see cars and carts and wagons
toiling up and down the avenues, and on the next intersecting pavement
sometimes a laborer with his jacket slung across his shoulder, or a dog
that had plainly made up his mind to go mad.

Then it appeared that the cook would not believe in them, and he did not
send them, till they were quite faint, the peppery and muddy draught
which impudently affected to be coffee, the oily slices of fugacious
potatoes slipping about in their shallow dish and skillfully evading
pursuit, the pieces of beef that simulated steak, the hot, greasy
biscuit, steaming evilly up into the face when opened, and then soddening
into masses of condensed dyspepsia.

"No," said Basil, not yet used to having his decisions reached without
his knowledge.

In a moment it had come, the first serious dispute of their wedded life.
It had come as all such calamities come, from nothing, and it was on them
in full disaster ere they knew.

(A reader suggested this additional quote:)
I suppose that almost any evil commends itself by its ruin; the wrecks of
slavery are fast growing a fungus crop of sentiment.





A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES, V1
[WH#13][wh1nf10.txt]3366

She was a little worn out with the care of housekeeping--Mrs. March
breathed, "Oh yes!" in the sigh with which ladies recognize one another's
martyrdom--

He experienced remorse in the presence of inanimate things he was going
to leave as if they had sensibly reproached him, and an anticipative
homesickness that seemed to stop his heart.

They were at that time of life when people first turn to their children's
opinion with deference.

He expected to do the wrong thing when left to his own devices, and he
did it without any apparent recollection of his former misdeeds and their
consequences. There was a good deal of comedy in it all, and some
tragedy.

She expected him in this event to do as he pleased, and she resigned
herself to it with considerable comfort in holding him accountable. He
learned to expect this, and after suffering keenly from her
disappointment with whatever he did he waited patiently till she forgot
her grievance and began to extract what consolation lurks in the
irreparable.





A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES, V2
[WH#14][wh2nf10.txt]3367

"Now, Alma," said her mother, with the clinging persistence of such
natures.

Mrs. March asked her husband what a dividend was. "It's a chicken before
it's hatched."

"I am not blue, Alma. But I cannot endure this--this hopefulness of
yours."

What you want is some man who can have patience with mediocrity putting
on the style of genius, and with genius turning mediocrity on his hands.

You know we Southerners have all had to go to woak. But Ah don't mand it.
I tell papa I shouldn't ca' fo' the disgrace of bein' poo' if it wasn't
fo' the inconvenience."

He had that timidity of the elder in the presence of the younger man
which the younger, preoccupied with his own timidity in the presence of
the elder, cannot imagine.





A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES, V3
[WH#15][wh3nf10.txt]3368

Dryfoos complained to his wife on the basis of mere affectional habit,
which in married life often survives the sense of intellectual equality.
He did not expect her to reason with him, but there was help in her
listening, and though she could only soothe his fretfulness with soft
answers which were often wide of the purpose, he still went to her for
solace.

He began to brag of his wife, as a good husband always does when another
woman charms him.

His courage hadn't been put to the test, and courage is a matter of
proof, like proficiency on the fiddle, you know: you can't tell whether
you've got it till you try."

I wish that old friend of hers would hurry up and git well--or something.

Men who have made money and do not yet know that money has made them....





A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES, V4
[WH#16][wh4nf10.txt]3369

He seemed to be lying in wait for some encroachment of the literary
department on the art department, and he met it now and then with
anticipative reprisal.

In the course of his married life March had learned not to censure the
irretrievable; but this was just what his wife had not learned....

She was too ignorant of her ignorance to recognize the mistakes she made.

But in these matters we have no right to burden our friends with our
decisions."

The Marches had no longer the gross appetite for novelty which urges
youth to a surfeit of strange scenes, experiences, ideas; and makes
travel, with all its annoyances and fatigues, an inexhaustible delight.





A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES, V5
[WH#17][wh5nf10.txt]3370

Death is an exile that no remorse and no love can reach. Remember that,
and be good to every one here on earth, for your longing to retrieve any
harshness or unkindness to the dead will be the very ecstasy of anguish
to you.

"Oh, death doesn't look bad," said March. "It's life that looks so in its
presence. Death is peace and pardon.

Does any one deserve happiness?

Let their love of justice hurry them into sympathy with violence.

"Does anything from without change us?" her husband mused aloud. "We're
brought up to think so by the novelists, who really have the charge of
people's thinking, nowadays.

"Yes, people that have convictions are difficult. Fortunately, they're
rare."

To do whatever one likes is finally to do nothing that one likes, even
though one continues to do what one will....




SILVER WEDDING JOURNEY, V1
[WH#18][wh1sw10.txt]3371

The wars come and go in blood and tears; but whether they are bad wars,
or what are comically called good wars, they are of one effect in death
and sorrow.

I don't know. It seems to me that I'm less and less certain of everything
that I used to be sure of.

But the madness of sight-seeing, which spoils travel, was on them, and
they delivered themselves up to it as they used in their ignorant youth,
though now they knew its futility so well. They spared themselves nothing
that they had time for.

Men would say anything from a reckless and culpable optimism.

While they all talked on together, and repeated the nothings they had
said already....





SILVER WEDDING JOURNEY, V2
[WH#19][wh2sw10.txt]3372
It's so deeply founded in nature that after denying royalty by word and
deed for a hundred years, we Americans are hungrier for it than anybody
else.

He buys my poverty and not my will.

There was no wild life to penetrate his isolation; no birds, not a
squirrel, not an insect; an old man who had bidden him good-morning, as
he came up, kept fumbling at the path with his hoe, and was less
intrusive than if he had not been there.

He lost the sense of his wife's presence, and answered her vaguely. She
talked contentedly on in the monologue to which the wives of absent-
minded men learn to resign themselves.

The disadvantage of living long is that we get too much into the hands of
other people.





SILVER WEDDING JOURNEY, V3
[WH#20][wh3sw10.txt]3373

Summoned the passengers to declare that they had nothing to declare, as a
preliminary to being searched like thieves at the dock.

It's the illusions: no marriage can be perfect without them, and at their
age the Kenbys can't have them.

You expected the ideal. And that's what makes all the trouble, in married
life: we expect too much of each other--we each expect more of the other
than we are willing to give or can give. If I had to begin over again, I
should not expect anything at all, and then I should be sure of being
radiantly happy.

She always came to his defence when he accused himself; it was the best
ground he could take with her.





THE ENTIRE MARCH FAMILY TRILOGY
[WH#21][whemf10.txt]3374

The sea-sickness was confined to those who seemed wilful sufferers.

The voting-cattle whom they bought and sold.

There is little proportion about either pain or pleasure: a headache
darkens the universe while it lasts, a cup of tea really lightens the
spirit bereft of all reasonable consolations.

She has a great respect for your mind, but she don't think you've got any
sense.

Uncounted thousands within doors prolonging, before the day's terror
began, the oblivion of sleep.

She wonders the happiest women in the world can look each other in the
face without bursting into tears, their happiness is so unreasonable, and
so built upon and hedged about with misery. She declares that there's
nothing so sad to her as a bride, unless it's a young mother, or a little
girl growing up in the innocent gayety of her heart. She wonders they can
live through it.





THE LANDLORD AT LIONS HEAD, V1
[WH#22][wh1lh10.txt]3375

Crimson torch of a maple, kindled before its time
Disposition to use his friends
Fear of asking too much and the folly of asking too little
Government is best which governs least
Honesty is difficult
Insensate pride that mothers have in their children's faults
Joyful shame of children who have escaped punishment
Married Man: after the first start-off he don't try
Nothing in the way of sport, as people commonly understand it
People whom we think unequal to their good fortune
Society interested in a woman's past, not her future
The great trouble is for the man to be honest with her
We're company enough for ourselves
Women talked their follies and men acted theirs
World seems to always come out at the same hole it went in at!





THE LANDLORD AT LIONS HEAD, V2
[WH#23][wh2lh10.txt]3376 

Boldest man is commonly a little behind a timid woman
Crimson which stained the tops and steeps of snow
Errors of a weak man, which were usually the basest
Exchanging inaudible banalities
He might walk home with her if he would not seem to do so
He's the same kind of a man that he was a boy
Hollow hilarities which people use to mask their indifference
If one must, it ought to be champagne
Intent upon some point in the future
No two men see the same star
Pathetic hopefulness
Picture which, he said to himself, no one would believe in
Quiet but rather dull look of people slightly deaf
Stupefied by a life of unalloyed prosperity and propriety
To be exemplary is as dangerous as to be complimentary
Want something hard, don't you know; but I want it to be easy
With all her insight, to have very little artistic sense
World made up of two kinds of people





CRITICISM AND FICTION
[WH#24][whcaf10.txt]3377

Authorities
Browbeat wholesome common-sense into the self-distrust
Comfort from the thought that most things cannot be helped
Concerning popularity as a test of merit in a book
Critical vanity and self-righteousness
Critics are in no sense the legislators of literature
Dickens rescued Christmas from Puritan distrust
Fact that it is hash many times warmed over that reassures them
Forbear the excesses of analysis
Glance of the common eye, is and always was the best light
Greatest classics are sometimes not at all great
Holiday literature
Imitators of one another than of nature
Languages, while they live, are perpetually changing
Let fiction cease to lie about life
Long-puerilized fancy will bear an endless repetition
Made them talk as seldom man and never woman talked
No greatness, no beauty, which does not come from truth
Novels hurt because they are not true
Plain industry and plodding perseverance are despised
Pseudo-realists
Public wish to be 