r free." In
classical Arabic only the imperative "Zar," and the aorist
"yazaru" of the verb "wazara" occur in this sense, while the
preterite is replaced by "taraka," or some other synonym. But the
language of the common people would not hesitate to use a form
scorned by the grammarians, and even to improve upon it by
deriving from it one of their favourite intensives.--St.]

[FN#376] Both are civil forms of refusal: for the first see vols.
i. 32; vi. 216; and for the second ix. 309.

[FN#377] Everything being fair in love and war and dealing with a
"Kafir," i.e. a non-Moslem.

[FN#378] In text "Labbayka" = here am I: see vol. i. 226.

[FN#379] In text "'éd Khayzaran" - wood of the rattan, which is
orig. "Rota," from the Malay "Rotan." Vol. ii. 66, &c.

[FN#380] [In the MS. "al-Zaman." The translation here adopted is
plausible enough. Still I think it probable that the careless
scribe has omitted the words "ya al-Malik" before it, and meant
to write "O king of the age!" as in so many preceding places.-
-St.]

[FN#381] Arab. "Al-Kuhna," plur. Of "Kahin 't" = diviner, priest
(non-Levitical): see "Cohen," ii. 221. [The form is rather
curious. The Dictionaries quote "Kuhna" as a Syriac singular, but
here it seems to be taken as a plural of the measure "fu'ala"
(Kuhana), like Umara of Amir or Shu'ara of Sha'ir. The usual
plurals of Kahin are Kahanah and Kuhhan.--St.]

[FN#382] This is a celebrated incident in "Alaeddin," "New lamps
for old:" See Suppl. vol. iii. 119.

[FN#383] In text "Jazdan" = a pencase (Pers.) more pop. called
"Kalamdan" = reed-box, vol. iv. 167: Scott (p. 212) has a
"writing-stand." It appears a queer place wherein to keep a ring,
but Easterns often store in these highly ornamented boxes signets
and other small matters.

[FN#384] Arab. "Bahr al-Muhit" = Circumambient Ocean; see vol. i.
133.

[FN#385] Arab. "Far" (plur. "Firan") = mouse rather than rat.

[FN#386] Sleep at this time is considered very unwholesome by
Easterns. See under "Kaylulah" = siesta, vols. i. 51; ii. 178,
and viii. 191.

[FN#387] Modern science which, out of the depths of its
self-consciousness, has settled so many disputed questions,
speaking by the organs of Messieurs Woodman and Tidy ("Medical
Jurisprudence") has decided that none of the lower animals can
bear issue to man. But the voice of the world is against them and
as Voltaire says one cannot be cleverer than everybody. To begin
with there is the will: the she-quadruman shows a distinct lust
for man by fondling him and displaying her parts as if to entice
him. That carnal connection has actually taken place cannot be
doubted: my late friend Mirza Ali Akbar, of Bombay, the famous
Munshi to Sir Charles Napier during the conquest of Sind, a man
perfectly veracious and trustworthy, assured me that in the
Gujarat province he had witnessed a case with his own eyes. He
had gone out "to the jungle," as the phrase is, with another
Moslem who, after keeping him waiting for an unconscionable time,
was found carnally united to a she-monkey. My friend, indignant
as a good Moslem should be, reproved him for his bestiality and
then asked him how it had come to pass: the man answered that the
she-monkey came regularly to look at him on certain occasions,
that he was in the habit of throwing her something to eat and
that her gratitude displayed such sexuality that he was tempted
and "fell." That the male monkey shows an equal desire for the
woman is known to every frequenter of the "Zoo." I once led a
party of English girls to see a collection of mandrill and other
anthropoid apes in the Menagerie of a well-known Russian
millionaire, near Florence, when the Priapism displayed was such
that the girls turned back and fled in fright. In the
mother-lands of these anthropoids (the Gaboon, Malacca etc.) the
belief is universal and women have the liveliest fear of them. In
1853 when the Crimean war was brewing a dog-faced baboon in Cairo
broke away from his "Kuraydati" (ape-leader), threw a girl in the
street and was about to ravish her when a sentinel drew his
bayonet and killer the beast. The event was looked upon as an
evil omen by the older men, who shook their heads and declared
that these were bad times when apes attempted to ravish the
daughters of Moslems. But some will say that the grand test, the
existence of the mule between man and monkey, though generally
believed in, is characteristically absent, absent as the "missing
link" which goes so far as to invalidate Darwinism in one and
perhaps the most important part of its contention. Of course the
offspring of such union would be destroyed, yet t he fact of our
never having found a trace of it except in legend and idle story
seems to militate against its existence. When, however, man shall
become "Homo Sapiens" he will cast off the prejudices of the
cradle and the nursery and will ascertain by actual experiment if
human being and monkey can breed together. The lowest order of
bimana, and the highest order of quadrumana may, under most
favourable circumstances, bear issue and the "Mule," who would
own half a soul, might prove most serviceable as a hewer of wood
and a drawer of water, in fact as an agricultural labourer. All
we can say is that such "miscegenation" stands in the category of
things not proven and we must object to science declaring them
non-existing. A correspondent favours me with the following note
upon the subject:--Castanheda (Annals of Portugal) relates that a
woman was transporter to an island inhabited by monkeys and took
up her abode in a cavern where she was visited by a huge baboon.
He brought her apples and fruit and at last had connection with
her, the result being two children in two to three years; but
when she was being carrier off by a ship the parent monkey kissed
his progeny. The woman was taken to Lisbon and imprisoned for
life by the King. Langius, Virgilius Polydorus and others quote
many instances of monstruous births in Rome resulting from the
connection of women with dogs and bears, and cows with horses,
&c. The following relative conditions are deduced on the
authority of MM. Jean Polfya and Mauriceau:--1. If the sexual
organism of man or woman be more powerful than that of the
monkey, dog, etc. the result will be a monster in the semblance
of man. 2. If vice-versa the appearance will be that of a beast.
3. If both are equal the result will be a distinct sub-species as
of the horse with the ass.

[FN#388] Arab. "Tanim" (plur. of Tamimit) = spells, charms,
amulets, as those hung to a horse's neck, the African Greegree
and the Heb. Thummim. As was the case with most of these earliest
superstitions, the Serpent, the Ark, the Cherubim, the Golden
Calf (Apis) and the Levitical Institution, the Children of Israel
derived the now mysterious term "Urim" (lights) and "Thummim"
(amulets) from Egypt and the Semitic word (Tamimah) still remains
to explain the Hebrew. "Thummim," I may add, is by "general
consensus" derived from "Tom" = completeness and is englished
"Perfection," but we can find a better origin near at hand in
spoken Arabic.

[FN#389] These verses have already occurred, see my vol. i. p.
275. I have therefore quoted Payne, i. p. 246.

[FN#390] Arab. "Wakil" who, in the case of a grown-up girl,
declares her consent to the marriage in the presence of two
witnesses and after part payment of the dowry.

[FN#391] Such is the meaning of the Arab. "Thayyib."

[FN#392] This appears to be the popular belief in Egypt. See vol.
iv. 297, which assures us that "no thing poketh and stroketh more
strenuously than the Gird" (or hideous Ahyssinian cynocephalus).
But it must be based upon popular ignorance: the private parts of
the monkey although they erect stiffly, like the priapus of
Osiris when swearing upon his Phallus, are not of the girth
sufficient to produce that friction which is essential to a
woman's pleasure. I may here allude to the general disappointment
in England and America caused by the exhibition of my friend Paul
de Chaillu's Gorillas: he had modestly removed penis and
testicles, the latter being somewhat like a bull's, and his
squeamishness caused not a little grumbling and sense of
grievance--especially amongst the curious sex.

[FN#393] [In the MS. "fahakat," lit. she flowed over like a
brimful vessel.--ST.]

[FN#394]  In 1821, Scott (p. 214) following Gilchrist's method of
transliterating eastern tongues wrote "Abou Neeut" and "Neeuteen"
(the latter a bad blunder making a masc. plural of a fem. dual). 
In 1822 Edouard Gauttier (vi. 320) gallicised the names to "Abou-
Nyout" and "Abou-Nyoutyn" with the same mistake and one
superadded; there is no such Arabic word as "Niyut."  Mr. Kirby
in 1822, "The New Arabian Nights" (p. 366) reduced the words to
"Abu Neut" and "Abu Neuteen," which is still less intelligible
than Scott's; and, lastly, the well-known Turkish scholar Dr.
Redhouse converted the tortured names to "Abu Niyyet" and "Abu
Niyyeteyn," thus rightly giving a "tashdid" (reduplication sign)
to the Ya (see Appendix p. 430 to Suppl. Vol. No iii. and Turk.
Dict. sub voce "Niyyat").  The Arab. is "Niyyah" = will, purpose,
intent; "Abu Niyyah" (Grammat. "Abu Niyyatin") Father of one
Intent = single-minded and "Abu Niyyatayn" = Father of two
Intents or double-minded; and Richardson is deficient when he
writes only "Niyat" for "Niyyat."  I had some hesitation about
translating this tale which begins with the "Envier and the
Envied" (vol. i. 123) and ends with the "Sisters who envied their
Cadette" (Supple. vol. iii. 313).  But the extant versions of it
are so imperfect in English and French that I made up my mind to
include it in this collection.--[Richardson's "Niyat" is rather
another, although rarer form of the same word.--St.]

[FN#395]  [I read: "wa tukarribu 'I-'abda ilayya," referring the
verb to "al-Sadakh" (the alms) and translating: "and it bringeth
the servant near to me," the speaker, in Coranic fashion supposed
to be Allah.--St.]

[FN#396]  The text prefers the Egyptian form "Sherifi" pl.
"Sherifiyah," which was adopted by the Portuguese.

[FN#397]  The grace after meat, "Bismillah" being that which
precedes it.  Abu Niyyah was more grateful than a youth of my
acquaintance who absolutely declined asking the Lord to "make him
truly thankful" after a dinner of cold mutton.

[FN#398]  [The root "Kart" is given in the dictionaries merely to
introduce the word "karit" = complete, speaking of a year, &c.,
and "Takrit," the name of a town in Mesopotamia, celebrated for
its velvets and as the birth-place of Saladin.  According to the
first mentioned word I would take the signification of "Kart" to
"complement" which here may fitly be rendered by "remainder," for
that which with regard to the full contents of the dinner tray is
their complement would of course be their remainder with regard
to the viands that have been eaten.--St.]

[FN#399]  For the "Zakat" = legal alms, which must not be less
than two-and-a-half per cent, see vol. i. 339.

[FN#400]  In text "Kazdir," for which see vols. iv. 274 and vi.
39.  Here is may allude to the canisters which make great show in
the general store of a petty shopkeeper.

[FN#401]  [The MS. reads "murafraf" (passive) from, "Rafraf" = a
shelf, arch, anything overhanging something else, there here
applying either to the eyebrows as overhanging the eyes, or to
the sockets, as forming a vault or cave for them.  Perhaps it
should be "murafrif" (active part), used of a bird, who spreads
his wings and circles round his prey, ready to pounce upon it;
hence with prying, hungry, greedy eyes.--St.]

[FN#402]  Arab.  "Niyyah" with the normal pun upon the name.

[FN#403]  Arab. "'Amil Rasad," lit. acting as an observatory: but
the style is broken as usual, and to judge from the third line
below the sentence may signify "And I am acting as Talisman (to
the Hoard)".

[FN#404]  In the text "Ishari," which may have many meanings: I
take a "shot" at the most likely.  In "The Tale of the Envier and
the Envied" the counter-spell in a fumigation by means of some
white hair plucked from a white spot, the size of a dirham, at
the tail-end of a black tom-cat (vol. i. 124).  According to the
Welsh legend, "the Devil hates cocks"--I suppose since that fowl
warned Peter of his fall.

[FN#405]  In text "Yaum al-Ahad," which begins the Moslem week:
see vols. iii. 249, and vi. 190.

[FN#406]  [In Ar. "Harj wa Laght."  The former is generally
joined with "Marj" (Harj wa Marj) to express utter confusion,
chaos, anarchy.  "Laght" (also pronounced Laghat and written with
the palatal "t") has been mentioned supra p. 11 as a synonym of
"Jalabah" = clamour, tumult, etc.--St.]

[FN#407]  [In Ar. "yahjubu," aor. Of "hajaba" = he veiled, put
out of sight, excluded, warded off.  Amongst other significations
the word is technically used of a nearer degree of relationship
excluding entirely or partially a more distant one from
inheritance.--St.]

[FN#408]  Arab.  "Yaum al-Jum'ah" = Assembly-day, Friday: see
vol. vi. 120.

[FN#409]  A regular Badawi remedy.  This Artemisia (Arab. Shayh),
which the Dicts. translate "wormwood of Pontus," is the sweetest
herb of the Desert, and much relished by the wild men: see my
"Pilgrimage," vol. i. 228.  The Finnish Arabist Wallin, who died
Professor of Arabic at Helsingfors, speaks of a "Farashat al-
Shayh" = a carpet of wormwood.

[FN#410]  "Sahibi-h," the masculine; because, as the old grammar
tells us, that gender is more worthy than the feminine.

[FN#411]  i.e., his strength was in the old: see vol. i. 340.

[FN#412]  Arab. "Haysumah" = smooth stones (water-rounded?).

[FN#413] For "his flesh was crushed upon his bones," a fair
specimen of Arab. "Metonomy-cum-hyperbole."  In the days when Mr.
John Bull boasted of his realism versus Gallic idealism, he "got
wet to the skin" when M. Jean Crapaud was mouille jusqu'aux os.

For the Angels supposed to haunt a pure and holy well, and the
trick played by Ibn Tumart, see Ibn Khaldun's Hist. of the
Berbers, vol. ii. 575.

[FN#414]  Here begins the second tale which is a weak replica of
Galland's "Two Sisters," &c.

[FN#415]  This is the usual term amongst savages and barbarians,
and during that period the father has no connection with the
mother.  Civilisation has abolished this natural practice which
is observed by all the lower animals and has not improved human
matters.  For an excellent dissertation on the subject see the
letter on Polygamy by Mrs. Belinda M. Pratt, in "The City of the
Saints," p. 525.

[FN#416]  In text "Kuwayyis," dim. of "Kayyis," and much used in
Egypt as an adj. = "pretty," "nice," and as an adv. "well,"
"nicely."  See s.v. Spitta Bey's Glossary to Contes Arabes
Modernes.  The word is familiar to the travellers in the Nile-
valley.

[FN#417]  In Arab. a "Kanat;" see vol. iii. 141.  The first
occupation came from nature; the second from seeing the work of
the adopted father.

[FN#418]  Abu Niyyah, like most house masters in the East, not to
speak of Kings, was the last to be told a truth familiar to
everyone but himself and his wife.

[FN#419]  The MS. breaks off abruptly at this sentence and
evidently lacks finish.  Scott (vi., 228) adds, "The young
princes were acknowledged and the good Abou Neeut had the
satisfaction of seeing them grow up to follow his example."

In the MS. this tale is followed by a "Story of his own
Adventures related by a connection to an Emir of Egypt."  I have
omitted it because it is a somewhat fade replica of "The Lovers
of the Banu Ozrah" (Vol. vii. 177; Lane iii. 247).

[FN#420] Mr. Chandler remarks (p. 25, "On Lending Bodleian Books,
&c."):--"It is said that the Curators can refuse any application
if they choose; of course they can, but as a matter of fact no
application has ever been refused, and every name added will make
it more and more difficult, more and more invidious to refuse
anyone." I have, therefore, the singular honour of being the
first chosen for rejection.

[FN#421] Mr. Chandler's motion (see p. 28, "Booklending, &c.")
was defeated by an amendment prepared by Professor Jowett and the
former fought, with mixed success, the report of the Committee of
Loans; the document being so hacked as to become useless, and, in
this mangled condition, it was referred back to the Committee
with a recommendation to consider the best way of carrying out
the present statute. The manly and straightforward course of at
once proposing a new statute was not adopted, nor was it even
formally proposed. Lastly, the applications for loans, which
numbered sixteen were submitted to the magnates and were all
refused! whilst the application of an Indian subject that MSS. be
sent to the India Office for his private use was at once granted.
In my case Professors B. Price and Max Muller, who had often
voted for loans, and were willing enough to lend anything to
anybody, declined to vote.

[FN#422] According to the statutes, "The Chancellor must be
acquainted with the Business (of altering laws concerning the
Library), and he must approve, and refer it to the Head of
Houses, else no dispensation can be proposed."

[FN#423] The following telegram from the Vienna correspondent of
"The Times" (November 16, 1886), is worth quotation:--

"The Committee of the Vienna Congress (of Orientalists) is now
preparing a memorial, which will be signed by Archduke Renier,
and will be forwarded in a few days to the trustees of the
British Museum and to the Secretary of State, praying that a Bill
may be introduced into Parliament empowering the British Museum
to lend out its Oriental MSS. to foreign savants under proper
guarantees. A resolution pledging the members of the Oriental
Congress to this course was passed at the Congress of Leyden, in
1883, on the motion of Professor D. H. Muller, of Vienna; but it
has not yet been acted upon so thoroughly as will be the case
now.

"The British Museum is the only great library in Europe which
does not lend out its MSS. to foreigners. The university and
court libraries of Vienna, the royal and state libraries of
Berlin and Munich, those of Copenhagen and Leyden, and
Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris all are very liberal in their
loans to well-recommended foreigners. In Paris a diplomatic
introduction is required. In Munich the library does not lend
directly to the foreign borrower; but sends to the library of the
capital whence the borrower may have made his application, and
leaves all responsibility to that library. In the other
libraries, the discretion is left to the librarian, who generally
lends without any formalities beyond ascertaining the bona fides
and trustworthiness of the applicant. In Vienna, however, there
has occasionally been some little excess of formality, so a
petition is about to be presented to the Emperor by the
University professors, begging that the privilege of borrowing
may be considered as general, and not as depending on the favour
of an official.

"As regards Oriental MSS., it is remarked that the guarantees
need not be so minute as in the case of old European MSS., which
are often unique copies. According to the learned Professor of
Sanskrit in this city, Herr George Buhler, there are very few
unique Oriental MSS. in existence of Sanskrit--perhaps not a
dozen."

[FN#424] (1.) "On Lending Bodleian Books and Manuscripts" (not
published). June 10, 1866; (2) Appendix. Barlow's Argument. June,
1866; (3) On Book-lending as practised at the Bodleian Library.
July 27, 1886; Baxter, Printer, Oxford. The three papers abound
in earnestness and energy; but they have the "defects of their
qualities," as the phrase is; and the subject often runs away
with the writer. A single instance will suffice. No. i. p. 23
says, "In a library like the Bodleian, where the practice of
lending prevails as it now does, a man may put himself to great
inconvenience in order to visit it; he may even travel from
Berlin, and when he arrives he may find that all his trouble has
been in vain, the very book he wants is out." This must have been
written during the infancy of Sir Rowland Hill, and when
telegrams were unknown to mankind; all that the Herr has to do in
our times is to ask per wire if the volume be at home or not.

[FN#425] Chandler, "On Lending Bodleian Books," etc., p. 18.

[FN#426] Koran, xxiii. 14.












This etext was scanned by JC Byers
(http://www.capitalnet.com/~jcbyers/index.htm) and proofread by
JC Byers, Diane Doerfler, Jeff Ferrell, Carrie R. Lorenz, and
Mats Wernersson.






                          SUPPLEMENTAL
                             NIGHTS
                  To The Book Of The Thousand
                   And One Nights With Notes
                      Anthropological And
                          Explanatory
                                
                               By
                       Richard F. Burton
                                
                          VOLUME FOUR
              Privately Printed By The Burton Club
                                
                                
                                
                 To William H. Chandler, Esq,.
                   Pembroke College, Oxford.
                                
My Dear Mr. Chandler,

     As without your friendly and generous aid this volume could
never have seen the light, I cannot resist the temptation of
inscribing it to you–and without permission, for your modesty
would have refused any such acknowledgment.

                    I am, ever,
                         Yours sincerely,
                              Richard F. Burton.

Trieste, March 10th, 1888.






               Contents of the Fourteenth Volume.



1.   Story of the Sultan of Al-Yaman and His Three Sons
2.   Story of the Three Sharpers
     a.   The Sultan Who Fared Forth in the Habit of a Darwaysh
     b.   History of Mohammed, Sultan of Cairo
     c.   Story of the First Lunatic
     d.   Story of the Second Lunatic
     e.   Story of the Sage and the Scholar
     f.   The Night-Adventure of Sultan Mohammed of Cairo with
          the Three Foolish
          Schoolmasters
     g.   Story of the Broke-Back Schoolmaster
     h.   Story of the Split-Mouthed Schoolmaster
     i.   Story of the Limping Schoolmaster
     j.   Story of the Three Sisters and Their Mother the
          Sultanah
3.   History of the Kazi Who Bare a Babe
4.   Tale of the Kazi and the Bhang-Eater
     a.   History of the Bhang-Eater and His Wife
     b.   How Drummer Abu Kasim Became a Kazi
     c.   Story of the Kazi and His Slipper
     d.   Tale of Mahmud the Persian and the Kurd Sharper
     e.   Tale of the Sultan and the Poor Man Who Brought To Him
          Fruit
     f.   The Fruit-Seller's Tale
     g.   Tale of the Sultan and His Three Sons and the
          Enchanting Bird
     h.   Adventure of the Fruit-Seller and the Concubine
     i.   Story of the King of Al-Yaman and His Three Sons and
          the Enchanting Bird
     j.   History of the First Larrikin
     k.   History of the Second Larrikin
     l.   History of the Third Larrikin
     m.   Story of a Sultan of Al-Hind and His Son Mohammed
     n.   Tale of the Fisherman and His Son
     o.   Tale of the Third Larrikin Concerning Himself
5.   History of Abu Niyyah and Abu Niyyatayn
Appendix A: - Ineptiæ Bodleianæ
Appendix B: - The Three Untranslated Tales in Mr. E. J. W. Gibb's
"Forty Vezirs"






                   The Translator's Foreword.
                                
                                

As my first and second volumes (Supplemental) were composed of
translated extracts from the Breslau Edition of The Nights, so
this tome and its successor (vols. iv. and v.) comprise my
version from the (Edward) Wortley Montague Codex immured in the
old Bodleian Library, Oxford.

Absence from England prevents for the present my offering a
satisfactory description of this widely known manuscript; but I
may safely promise that the hiatus shall be filled up in vol. v.,
which is now ready for the press.

The contents of the Wortley Montague text are not wholly
unfamiliar to Europe. In 1811 Jonathan Scott, LL.D. Oxon. (for
whom see my vols. i., ix. and x. 434), printed with Longmans and
Co. his "Arabian Nights Entertainments" in five substantial
volumes 8vo, and devoted a sixth and last to excerpts entitled

                             TALES
               SELECTED FROM THE MANUSCRIPT COPY
                             OF THE
                          1001 NIGHTS
                                
       BROUGHT TO EUROPE BY EDWARD WORTLEY MONTAGUE, ESQ.
                                
                   Translated from the Arabic
                    BY JONATHAN SCOTT, LL.D.

Unfortunately for his readers Scott enrolled himself amongst the
acolytes of Professor Galland, a great and original genius in the
line Raconteur, and a practical Orientalist whose bright example
was destined to produce disastrous consequences. The Frenchman,
however unscrupulous he might have been about casting down and
building up in order to humour the dead level of Gallican bon
goût, could, as is shown by his "Aladdin," trans- late literatim
and verbatim when the story-stuff is of the right species and
acceptable to the average European taste. But, as generally
happens in such cases, his servile suite went far beyond their
master and model. Petis de la Croix ("Persian and Turkish
Tales"), Chavis and Cazotte ("New Arabian Nights"), Dow ("Ináyatu
llah") and Morell ("Tales of the Genii"), with others manifold
whose names are now all but forgotten, carried out the Gallandian
liberties to the extreme of licence and succeeded in producing a
branchlet of literature, the most vapid, frigid and insipid that
can be imagined by man,--a bastard Europeo-Oriental,
pseudo-Eastern world of Western marionettes garbed in the gear
which Asiatic are (or were) supposed to wear, with sentiments and
opinions, manners and morals to match; the whole utterly lacking
life, local colour, vraisemblance, human interest. From such
abortions, such monstrous births, libera nos, Domine!

And Scott out-gallanded Galland:--

Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.

It is hard to quote a line which he deigned textually to
translate. He not only commits felony on the original by
abstracting whole sentences and pages ad libitum, but he also
thrusts false goods into his author's pocket and patronises the
unfortunate Eastern story-teller by foisting upon him whatever
he, the "translator and traitor," deems needful. On this point no
more need be said: the curious reader has but to compare any one
of Scott's "translations" with the original or, for that matter,
with the present version.

I determined to do that for Scott which Lane had done partly and
imperfectly, and Payne had successfully and satisfactorily done
for Galland. But my first difficulty was about the text. It was
impossible to face without affright the prospect of working for
months amid the discomforts and the sanitary dangers of Oxford's
learned atmosphere and in her obsolete edifices the Bodleian and
the Radcliffe. Having ascertained, however, that in the so-called
"University" not a scholar could be found to read the text, I was
induced to apply for a loan--not to myself personally for I
should have shunned the responsibility--but in the shape of a
temporary transfer of the seven-volumed text, tome by tome, to
the charge of Dr. Rost, the excellent Librarian of the India
Office.

My hopes, however, were fated to be deferred. Learned bodies,
Curators and so forth, are ponderous to move and powerless to
change for

          The trail of the slow-worm is over them all.

My official application was made on September 13th, 1886. The
tardiest steps were taken as if unwillingly and, when they could
no longer decently be deferred, they resulted in the curtest and
most categorical but not most courteous of refusals, under
circumstances of peculiar disfavour, on November 1st of the same
year. Here I shall say no more: the correspondence has been
relegated to Appendix A. My subscribers, however, will have no
reason to complain of these "Ineptiæ Bodleianæ." I had pledged
myself in case of a loan "not to translate Tales that might be
deemed offensive to propriety:" the Curators have kindly set me
free from that troublesome condition and I thank them therefor.

Meanwhile I had not been idle. Three visits to Oxford in
September and October had enabled me to reach the DIVth Night.
But the laborious days and inclement evenings, combined with the
unsanitary state of town and libraries--the Bodleian and the
Rotunda--brought on a serious attack of "lithiasis" as it is now
called, and prostrated me for two months, until it was time to
leave England en route for my post.

Under these circumstances my design threatened to end in failure.
As often befalls to men out of England, every move ventured by me
menaced only check-mate. I began by seeking a copyist at Oxford,
one who would imitate the text as an ignoramus might transcribe
music: an undergraduate volunteered for the task and after a few
days dropped it in dumb disgust. The attempt was presently
repeated by a friend with the unsatisfactory result that three
words out of four were legible. In London several Easterns were
described as able and willing for the work; but they also were
found wanting; one could not be trusted with the MS. and another
was marriage-mad. Photography was lastly proposed, but
considerations of cost seemed to render it unavailable. At last,
when matters were at the worst, the proverbial amendment
appeared. Mr. Chandler, whose energetic and conscientious
opposition to all "Bodleian loans," both of books and of
manuscripts, had mainly caused the passing of the prohibitory
statute, came forward in the most friendly and generous way: with
no small trouble to himself he superintended the "sun- pictures,"
each page of the original being reduced to half-size, and he
insisted upon the work being done wholly and solely at his own
expense. I know not how to express my gratitude.

The process was undertaken by Mr. Percy Notcutt, of Kingsbury and
Notcutt, 45, St. George's Place, Knightsbridge, and the four
hundred and odd pages were reproduced in most satisfactory style.

Being relegated to a port-town which never possessed even an
Arabic lexicon, I have found some difficulty with the Wortley
Montague MS. as it contains a variety of local words unknown to
the common dictionaries. But I have worked my best to surmount
the obstacle by consulting many correspondents, amongst whom may
be mentioned the name of my late lamented friend, the Reverend
George Percy Badger; and, finally, by submitting my proofs to the
corrections and additions of the lexicologist Dr. Steingass.

Appendix B will require no apology to the numerous admirers of
Mr. E. J. W. Gibb's honest and able work, "The History of the
Forty Vezirs" (London, Redway, MDCCCLXXXVI). The writer in a book
intended for the public was obliged to leave in their original
Turkish, and distinguished only by italics, three "facetious"
tales which, as usual, are some of the best in the book. These
have been translated for me and I offer them to my readers on
account of their curious analogies with many in The Nights.

Richard F. Burton.

TRIESTE, April 10th, 1888.






                      Supplemental Nights
                                
                       To The Book Of The
                                
                  Thousand Nights And A Night






   Story of the Sultan of Al-Yaman and His three Sons.[FN#1]




There was erewhile in the land of Al-Yaman a man which was a
Sultan and under him were three Kinglets whom he overruled. He
had four children; to wit, three sons and a daughter: he also
owned wealth and treasures greater than reed can pen or page may
contain; as well as animals such as horses and camels, sheep and
black cattle; and he was held in awe by all the sovrans. But when
his reign had lasted for a length of time, Age[FN#2] brought with
it ailments and infirmities and he became incapable of faring
forth his Palace to the Divan, the hall of audience; whereupon he
summoned his three sons to the presence and said to them, "As for
me, 'tis my wish to divide among you all my substance ere I die,
that ye may be equal in circumstance and live in accordance with
whatso I shall command." And they said, "Hearkening and
obedience." Then quoth the Sultan, "Let the eldest of you become
sovereign after me: let the cadet succeed to my moneys and
treasures[FN#3] and as for the youngest let him inherit my
animals of every kind. Suffer none to transgress against other;
but each aid each and assist his co-partner." He then caused them
to sign a bond and agreement to abide by his bequeathal; and,
after delaying a while, he departed to the mercy of Allah.
Thereupon his three sons got ready the funeral gear and whatever
was suited to his estate for the mortuary obsequies such as
cerements and other matters: they washed the corpse and
enshrouded it and prayed over it: then, having committed it to
the earth they returned to their palaces where the Wazirs and the
Lords of the Land and the city-folk in their multitudes, high and
low, rich and poor, flocked to condole with them on the loss of
their father. And the news of his decease was soon bruited abroad
in all the provinces; and deputations from each and every city
came to offer condolence to the King's sons. These ceremonies
duly ended, the eldest Prince demanded that he should be seated
as Sultan on the stead of his sire in accordance with the
paternal will and testament; but he could not obtain it from his
two brothers as both and each said, "I will become ruler in room
of my father." So enmity and disputes for the government now
arose amongst them and it was not to be won by any; but at last
quoth the eldest Prince, "Wend we and submit ourselves to the
arbitration of a Sultan of the tributary sultans; and let him to
whom he shall adjudge the realm take it and reign over it." Quoth
they "'Tis well!" and thereto agreed, as did also the Wazirs; and
the three set out without suite seeking the capital of one of the
subject Sovrans.--And Shahrázád[FN#4] was surprised by the dawn
of day[FN#5] and fell silent and ceased to say her permitted say.
Then quoth her sister Dunyázád, "How sweet is thy story, O sister
mine, and how enjoyable and delectable!" Quoth she, "And where is
this compared with that I would relate to you on the coming
night, an the King suffer me to survive?" Now when it was the
next night and that was

             The Three Hundred and Thirtieth Night,

Dunyazad said to her, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou be
other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!" She replied, "With love
and good will!" It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting
and of deed fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the three
Princes fared seeking a Sultan of the sultans who had been under
the hands of their sire, in order that they might take him to
arbitrator. And they stinted not faring till the middle way, when
behold, they came upon a mead abounding in herbage and in
rainwater lying sheeted.[FN#6] So they sat them down to rest and
to eat of their victual, when one of the brothers, casting his
eye upon the herbage, cried, "Verily a camel hath lately passed
this way laden half with Halwá-sweetmeats and half with
Hámiz-pickles."[FN#7] "True," cried the second, "and he was blind
of an eye." Exclaimed the third, "'Tis sooth; and indeed he hath
lost his tail." Hardly, however, had they ended their words when
lo! the owner of the camel came upon them (for he had overheard
their speech and had said to himself, "By Allah, these three
fellows have driven off my property, inasmuch as they have
described the burthen and eke the beast as tail-less and
one-eyed"), and cried out, "Ye three have carried away my
camel!"[FN#8] "By Allah we have not seen him," quoth the Princes,
"much less have we touched him;" but quoth the man, "By the
Almighty, who can have taken him except you? and if you will not
deliver him to me, off with us, I and you three, to the Sultan."
They replied, "By all manner of means; let us wend to the
Sovran." So the four hied forth, the three Princes and the
Cameleer, and ceased not faring till they reached the capital of
the King. There they took seat without the wall to rest for an
hour's time and presently they arose and pushed into the city and
came to the royal Palace. Then they craved leave of the
Chamberlains, and one of the Eunuchs caused them enter and
signified to the sovereign that the three sons of Such-and-such a
Sultan had made act of presence. So he bade them be set before
him and the four went in and saluted him, and prayed for him and
he returned their salams. He then asked them, "What is it hath
brought you hither and what may ye want in the way of enquiry?"
Now the first to speak was the Cameleer and he said, "O my lord
the Sultan; verily these three men have carried off my camel by
proof of their own speech."--And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and fell silent and ceased saying her permitted say. Then
quoth her sister Dunyazad, "How sweet and tasteful is thy tale, O
sister mine, and enjoyable and delectable!" Quoth she, "And where
is this compared with that I would relate to you on the coming
night an the Sovran suffer me to survive?" Now when it was the
next night and that was

           The Three Hundred and Thirty-first Night,

Dunyazad said to her, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou be
other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!" She replied, "With love
and good will!" It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting
and of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the
Cameleer came forward between the Sultan's hands and said, "O my
lord, verily these men have carried away the camel which
belongeth to me,[FN#9] for they have indeed described him and the
burthen he bore! And I require of our lord the Sultan that he
take from these wights and deliver to me the camel which is mine
as proved by their own words." Presently asked the Sultan, "What
say ye to the claims of this man and the camel belonging to him?"
Hereto the Princes made answer, "By Allah, O King of the Age, we
have not seen the camel, much less have we stolen him." Thereupon
the Cameleer exclaimed, "O my lord, I heard yonder one say that
the beast was blind of an eye; and the second said that he was
tail-less, and the third said that half his load was of sour
stuff and the other half was of sweet stuff." They replied,
"True, we spake these words;" and the Sultan cried to them, "Ye
have purloined the beast by this proof." They rejoined, "No, by
Allah, O my lord. We sat us in such a place for repose and
refreshment and we remarked that some of the pasture had been
grazed down, so we said, 'This is the grazing of a camel; and he
must have been blind of one eye as the grass was eaten only on
one side.' But as for our saying that he was tail-less, we noted
the droppings lying heaped[FN#10] upon the ground which made us
agree that the tail must have been cut off, it being the custom
of camels at such times to whisk their tails and scatter the dung
abroad. So 'twas evident to us that the camel had lost his tail.
But as for our saying that the load was half Halwá and half
Hámiz, we saw on the place where the camel had knelt the flies
gathering in great numbers while on the other were none: so the
case was clear to us (as flies settle on naught save the sugared)
that one of the panniers must have contained sweets and the other
sours." Hearing this the Sultan said to the Cameleer, "O man,
fare thee forth and look after thy camel; for these signs and
tokens prove not the theft of these men, but only the power of
their intellect and their penetration."[FN#11] And when the
Cameleer heard this, he went his ways. Presently the Sultan
cleared a place in the Palace and allotted to it the Princes for
their entertainment: he also directed they be supplied with a
banquet and the eunuchs did his bidding. But when it was eventide
and supper was served up, the trio sat down to it purposing to
eat; the eldest, however, having hent in hand a bannock of bread
exclaimed, "By Allah, verily this cake was baked by a woman in
blood, to wit, one with the menses." The cadet tasting a bit of
kid exclaimed, "This kid was suckled by a bitch"; and the
youngest exclaimed, "Assuredly this Sultan must be a son of
shame, a bastard." All this was said by the youths what while the
Sultan had hidden himself in order to hear and to profit by the
Princes' words. So he waxed wroth entered hastily crying, "What
be these speeches ye have spoken?" They replied, "Concerning all
thou hast heard enquire within and thou wilt find it wholly
true." The Sultan then entered his women's apartments and after
inquisition found that the woman who had kneaded the bread was
sick with her monthly courses. He then went forth and summoned
the head-shepherd and asked him concerning the kid he had
butchered. He replied, "By Allah, O my lord, the nanny-goat that
bare the kid died and we found none other in milk to suckle him;
but I had a bitch that had just pupped and her have I made
nourish him." The Sultan lastly hent his sword in hand and
proceeded to the apartments of the Sultánah-mother and cried, "By
Allah, unless thou avert my shame[FN#12] we will cut thee down
with this scymitar! Say me whose son am I?" She replied, "By
Allah, O my child, indeed falsehood is an excuse, but fact and
truth are more saving and superior. Verily thou art the son of a
cook!"--And Shahrazad was surprised by the dawn of day and fell
silent and ceased to say her permitted say. Then quoth her sister
Dunyazad, "How sweet is thy story, O sister mine, and how
enjoyable and delectable!" Quoth she, "And where is this compared
with that I would relate to you on the coming night, an the King
suffer me to survive?" Now when it was the next night and that
was

           The Three Hundred and Thirty-second Night,

Dunyazad said to her, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou be
other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!" She replied, "With love
and good will!" It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting
and of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the
Sultan's mother said to him, "Verily thou art a cook's son. Thy
sire could not beget boy-children and I bare him only a single
daughter. But it so fortuned that the kitchener's wife lay in of
a boy (to wit, thyself); so we gave my girl-babe to the cook and
took thee as the son of the Sultan, dreading for the realm after
thy sire's death." The King went forth from his mother in
astonishment at the penetration of the three youths and, when he
had taken seat in his Palace, he summoned the trio and as soon as
they appeared he asked them; "Which of you was it that said, 'She
who kneaded the bread was in blood'?" Quoth the eldest, "That was
I;" and quoth the King, "What led thee to suspect that she was
menstruous?" He replied, "O my lord, when I took the bannock and
broke off a bittock, the flour fell out in lumps.[FN#13] Now had
the kneader been well, her strength of hand would have remained
and the bread would have been wrought by all the veins; but, when
the blood came, her powers were minished for women's force is in
their hands; and as soon as the monthly period cometh upon them
their strength is lost. Their bodies contain three hundred and
sixty veins all lying hard by one another and the blood of the
catamenia floweth from them all; hence their force becometh
feebleness. And this was my proof of the woman which was
menstruous." Quoth the Sultan, "'Tis well. We accept as certain
thy saying upon this evidence, for it is agreeable to man's
understanding nor can any challenge it; this being from the power
of insight into the condition of womankind. And we are assured of
its soothfastness, for 'tis evident to us without concealment.
But which is he who said of the kid's meat that the beast was
suckled by a bitch? What proof had he of this? How did he learn
it and whence did his intelligence discover it to him?" Now when
the deceased Sultan's second son heard these words, he made
answer. "I, O King of the Age, am he who said that say!" The King
replied, "'Tis well;" and the Prince resumed, "O my lord, that
which showed me the matter of the meat which was to us brought is
as follows. I found the fat of the kid all hard by the bone, and
I knew that the beast had sucked bitch's milk; for the flesh of
dogs lieth outside and their fat is on their bones, whereas in
sheep and goats the fat lieth upon the meat. Such, then, was my
proof wherein there is nor doubt nor hesitation; and when thou
shalt have made question and inquiry thou wilt find this to be
fact." Quoth the Sultan, "'Tis well; thou hast spoken truth and
whatso thou sayest is soothfast. But which is he who declared
that I am a bastard and what was his proof and what sign in me
exposed it to him?" Quoth the youngest Prince, "I am he who said
it;" and the Sultan rejoined, "There is no help but that thou
provide me with a proof." The Prince rejoined, "'Tis well!"--And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and fell silent and ceased
saying her permitted say. Then quoth her sister Dunyazad, "How
sweet and tasteful is thy tale, O sister mine, and enjoyable and
delectable!" Quoth she, "And where is this compared with that I
would relate to you on the coming night an the Sovran suffer me
to survive?" Now when it was the next night and that was

           The Three Hundred and Thirty-third Night,

Dunyazad said to her, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou be
other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!" She replied, "With love
and good will!" It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding lord of the rede which is benefiting
and of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the
youngest Prince said to the Sultan, "O my lord, I have evidence
that thou art the son of a cook and a base-born in that thou
didst not sit at meat with us and this was mine all-sufficient
evidence. Every man hath three properties which he inheriteth at
times from his father, at times from his maternal uncle and at
times from his mother.[FN#14] From his sire cometh generosity or
niggardness; from his uncle courage or cowardice; from his mother
modesty or immodesty; and such is the proof of every man." Then
quoth to him the Sultan, "Sooth thou speakest; but say me, men
who like you know all things thoroughly by evidence and by your
powers of penetration, what cause have they to come seeking
arbitration at my hand? Beyond yours there be no increase of
intelligence. So fare ye forth from me and manage the matter
amongst yourselves, for 'tis made palpable to me by your own
words that naught remaineth to you save to speak of mysterious
subjects;[FN#15] nor have I the capacity to adjudge between you
after that which I have heard from you. In fine an ye possess any
document drawn up by your sire before his decease, act according
to it and contrary it not." Upon this the Princes went forth from
him and made for their own country and city and did as their
father had bidden them do on his death-bed. The eldest enthroned
himself as Sultan; the cadet assumed possession and management of
the moneys and treasures and the youngest took to himself the
camels and the horses and the beeves and the muttons. Then each
and every was indeed equal with his co-partner in the gathering
of good. But when the new year came, there befel a drought among
the beasts and all belonging to the youngest brother died nor had
he aught of property left: yet his spirit brooked not to take
anything from his brethren or even to ask of them aught. This
then is the Tale of the King of Al-Yaman in its entirety; yet is
the Story of the Three Sharpers[FN#16] more wondrous and
marvellous than that just recounted.--And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and fell silent and ceased to say her
permitted say. Then quoth her sister Dunyazad, "How sweet is thy
story, O sister mine, and how enjoyable and delectable!" Quoth
she, "And where is this compared with that I would relate to you
on the coming night, an the King suffer me to survive." Now when
it was the next night and that was

           The Three Hundred and Thirty-fourth Night,

Dunyazad said to her, "Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou be
other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!" She replied, "With love
and good will! It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting
and of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating;" and she began
to recount




            THE STORY OF THE THREE SHARPERS.[FN#17]



Saying, "Verily their adventure is wondrous and their actions
delightsome and marvellous," presently adding--There were in time
of yore three Sharpers who were wont every day in early morning
to prowl forth and to prey, rummaging[FN#18] among the mounds
which outlay the city. Therein each would find a silver bit of
five parahs or its equivalent, after which the trio would for-
gather and buy whatso sufficed them for supper: they would also
expend two Nusfs[FN#19] upon Bast,[FN#20] which is Bhang, and
purchase a waxen taper with the other silver bit. They had hired
a cell in the flank of a Wakálah, a caravanserai without the
walls, where they could sit at ease to solace themselves and eat
their Hashísh after lighting the candle and enjoy their
intoxication and consequent merriment till the noon o' night.
Then they would sleep, again awaking at day-dawn when they would
arise and seek for spoil, according to their custom, and ransack
the heaps where at times they would hit upon a silverling of five
dirhams and at other times a piece of four; and at eventide they
would meet to spend together the dark hours, and they would
expend everything they came by every day. For a length of time
they pursued this path until, one day of the days, they made for
the mounds as was their wont and went round searching the heaps
from morning to evening without finding even a half-parah;
wherefore they were troubled and they went away and nighted in
their cell without meat or drink. When the next day broke they
arose and repaired for booty, changing the places wherein they
were wont to forage; but none of them found aught; and their
breasts were straitened for lack of a find of dirhams wherewith
to buy them supper. This lasted for three full-told and following
days until hunger waxed hard upon them and vexation; so they said
one to other, "Go we to the Sultan and let us serve him with a
sleight, and each of us three shall claim to be a past master of
some craft: haply Allah Almighty may incline his heart uswards
and he may largesse us with something to expend upon our
necessities." Accordingly all three agreed to do on this wise and
they sought the Sultan whom they found in the palace-garden. They
asked leave to go in to him, but the Chamberlains refused
admission: so they stood afar off unable to approach the
presence. Then quoth they one to other, "'Twere better we fall to
and each smite his comrade and cry aloud and make a
clamour,[FN#21] and as soon as he shall hear us he will send to
summon us." Accordingly they jostled one another and each took to
frapping his fellow, making the while loud outcries. The Sultan
hearing this turmoil said, "Bring me yonder wights;" and the
Chamberlains and Eunuchs ran out to them and seized them and set
them between the hands of the Sovran. As soon as they stood in
the presence he asked them, "What be the cause of your wrath one
against other?" They answered, "O King of the Age, we are past
masters of crafts, each of us weeting an especial art." Quoth the
Sultan, "What be your crafts?" and quoth one of the trio, "O our
lord, as for my art I am a jeweller by trade." The King
exclaimed, "Passing strange! a sharper and a jeweller:[FN#22]
this is a wondrous matter." And he questioned the secon