moning the midwife asked her, saying, "By the virtue of my
predecessors in this kingdom, do thou tell me the truth
concerning my spouse, whether or no she was delivered of two dog-
pups," and she answered, "No, by Allah, O King of the Age, verily
the Queen bare thee two babes like full moons and the cause of
their exposure before the garden gate was thy wife's two sisters
who envied her and did with her these deeds whereof she was not
aware."[FN#418]  hereupon cried Abu Niyyah, "Alhamdolillah--Glory
be to God who hat brought about this good to me and hath united
me with my children, and soothfast is the say, ‘Whoso doeth an
action shall be requited of his Lord and the envious wight hath
no delight and of his envy he shall win naught save
despight.'"[FN#419]  Then the King of Mosul, being a man of good
intent, did not put to death his wife's sisters and their
husbands, but banished them his realm, and he lived happily with
his Queen and children until such time as the Destroyer of
delights and the Severer of societies came to him and he deceased
to the mercy of Almighty Allah.




                       END OF VOLUME XIV.
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                
                          Appendix A.
                                
                                
                                
                       INEPTIÆ BODLEIANÆ.



The reader will not understand this allusion (Foreword, p. ix.)
without some connaissance de cause. I would apologise for
deforming the beautiful serenity and restfulness of The Nights by
personal matter of a tone so jarring and so discordant a sound,
the chatter and squabble of European correspondence and
contention; but the only course assigned to me perforce is that
of perfect publicity. The first part of the following papers
appeared by the editor's kindness in "The Academy" of November
13, 1886. How strange the contrast of "doings" with "sayings," if
we compare the speech reported to have been delivered by Mr.
Librarian Nicholson at the opening of the Birmingham Free Public
Central Lending and Reference Libraries, on June 1, 1882:--

"As for the Bodleian, I claim your sympathies, not merely because
we are trying to do as much for our readers as you are for yours,
but because, if the building which you have opened to-day is the
newest free public library in the world, the building which I
left earlier in the morning is the oldest free public library in
the world. (No!) I call it a free public library because any
Birmingham artizan who came to us with a trustworthy
recommendation might ask to have the rarest gem in our collection
placed before him, and need have no fear of asking in vain; and
because, if a trusty Birmingham worker wanted the loan of a MS.
for three months, it would be lent to the Central Free Library
for his use." See Twentieth and Twenty-first Annual Reports of
the Free Libraries Committee (Borough of Birmingham), 1883.

And now to my story. The play opens with the following letter:--

No. I.

23, DORSET STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE,
Sept. 13, 1886.

"Sir,

"I have the honour to solicit your assistance in the following
matter:--

"Our friend Dr. Steingass has kindly consented to collaborate
with me in re-translating from the Wortley Montague MS. of the
Bodleian Library, Oxford, the tales originally translated in vol.
vi. of Dr. Jonathan Scott's 'Arabian Nights.' Dr. Steingass
cannot leave town, and I should find it very inconvenient to live
at Oxford during the work, both of us having engagements in
London. It would be a boon to us if the Curators of the Bodleian
would allow the MS. to be transferred, volume by volume, to the
India Office, and remain under the custody of the Chief
Librarian--yourself. The whole consists of seven volumes, as we
would begin with vols. iii. and iv. I may note that the
translated tales (as may be seen by Scott's version) contain
nothing indelicate or immoral; in fact the whole MS. is
exceptionally pure. Moreover, the MS., as far as I can learn, is
never used at Oxford. I am the more anxious about this matter as
the November fogs will presently drive me from England, and I
want to end the extracts ere winter sets in, which can be done
only by the co-operation of Dr. Steingass.

I have the honour to be, sir,

Yours obediently,
(Signed) RICHARD F. BURTON."

"DR. R. ROST,
Chief Librarian, India Office."

As nearly a month had elapsed without my receiving any reply, I
directed the following to the Vice-Chancellor of the University,
Rev. Dr. Bellamy:--

No. II.

ATHENAEUM CLUB, PALL MALL,
Oct. 13, 1886.

"Sir,

"I have the honour to submit to you the following details:--

"On September 13, 1886, I wrote to Dr. Rost, Chief Librarian,
India Office, an official letter requesting him to apply to the
Curators of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, for the temporary
transfer of an Arabic Manuscript, No. 522 (the Wortley Montague
text of the Arabian Nights) to the library of the India Office,
there to be kept under special charge of the Chief Librarian.
There being seven volumes, I wanted only one or two at a time. I
undertook not to keep them long, and, further, I pledged myself
not to translate tales that might be deemed offensive to
propriety.

"Thus, I did not apply for a personal loan of the MS. which,
indeed, I should refuse on account of the responsibility which it
would involve. I applied for the safe and temporary transfer of a
work, volume by volume, from one public library to another.

"My official letter was forwarded at once by Dr. Rost, but this
was the only expeditious step. On Saturday, September 25, the
Curators could form no quorum; the same thing took place on
Saturday, October 9; and there is a prospect that the same will
take place on Saturday, October 23.

"I am acquainted with many of the public libraries of Europe, but
I know of none that would throw such obstacles in the way of
students.

"The best authorities inform me that until June, 1886, the
signatures of two Curators enabled a student to borrow a book or
a manuscript; but that since June a meeting of three Curators has
been required; and that a lesser number does not form a quorum.

"May I be permitted to suggest that the statute upon the subject
of borrowing books and manuscripts urgently calls for revision?

I have the honour to be, sir,

Yours obediently,
(Signed) RICHARD F. BURTON.

"THE VICE-CHANCELLOR, OXFORD."

The Curators presently met and the following was the highly
unsatisfactory result which speaks little for "Bodleian" kindness
or courtesy:--

No. III.

Monday, Nov. 1, 1886.

"DEAR SIR RICHARD BURTON,

"The Curators considered your application on Saturday, Oct. 30,
afternoon, and the majority of them were unwilling to lend the
MS[FN#420]

Yours very truly,
(Signed) EDWARD B. NICHOLSON."

Learning through a private source that my case had been made an
unpleasant exception to a long-standing rule of precedent, and
furthermore that it had been rendered peculiarly invidious by an
act of special favour,[FN#421] I again addressed the
Vice-Chancellor, as follows:--

No. IV.

23, DORSET STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE,
November 3rd, 1886.

"Sir,

"I have the honour to remind you that, on October 13, I
communicated with you officially requesting a temporary transfer
of the Wortley Montague manuscript (Arabian Nights) from the
Bodleian Library to the personal care of the Librarian, India
Office.

"To this letter I received no reply. But on November 1, I was
informed by Mr. Librarian Nicholson that the Curators had
considered my application on Saturday, October 30, and that the
majority of them were unwilling to lend the manuscript.

"The same Curators at the same meeting allowed sundry manuscripts
for the use of an Indian subject to be sent to the India Office.

"I cannot but protest against this invidious proceeding, and I
would willingly learn what cause underlies it.

"1. It cannot be the importance of the manuscript, which is one
of the meanest known to me--written in a schoolmaster character,
a most erroneous, uncorrected text, and valuable only for a few
new tales.

"2. It cannot be any consideration of public morals, for I
undertook (if the loan were granted) not to translate tales which
might be considered offensive to strict propriety.

"3. It cannot be its requirement for local use. The manuscript
stands on an upper shelf in the manuscript room, and not one man
in the whole so-called 'University' can read it.

I have the honour to be, sir,

Yours obediently,
RICHARD F. BURTON."

"THE VlCE-CHANCELLOR, OXFORD."

In due time came the reply:--

No. V.

ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE, OXFORD,
November 6th, 1886.

"Dear Sir,

"I will remove from your mind the belief that I treated your
former letter with discourtesy.

"I may say, that it did not appear to me to contain any question
or request which I could answer. You informed me that you had
made formal application in September for a loan of MSS., and your
letter was to complain of the delay in considering this request.
You told me that you had learned from the Librarian the cause of
the delay (the want of a quorum), and that he had intimated that
there would probably be no meeting formed before October 30th.

"You complained of this, and suggested that the statute
regulating the lending of the Bodleian books should be speedily
revised.

"As I had no power to make a quorum, nor to engage that your
suggestion should be adopted; and as your letter made no demand
for any further information, I thought it best to reserve it for
the meeting of the 30th, when I communicated it to the Curators.

"I will lay the letter (dated November 3rd), with which you have
favoured me, before the next meeting of the Curators.

I beg to remain,

Yours faithfully,
(Signed) J. BELLAMY."

"SIR R. F. BURTON."

To resume this part of the subject.

The following dates show that I was kept waiting six weeks before
being finally favoured with the curtest of refusals:

Application made on September 13th, and sent on.

On Saturday, September 25th, Curators could not form quorum, and
deferred next meeting till Saturday, October 9th.

Saturday, October 9th. Again no quorum; and yet it might easily
have been formed, as three Curators were on or close to the spot.

Saturday, October 23rd. Six Curators met and did nothing.

Saturday, October 30th. Curators met and refused me the loan of
MS.

My letter addressed to the Vice-Chancellor was read, and notice
was given for Saturday (December 3rd, 1886) of a motion, "That
the MS. required by Sir R. F. Burton be lent to him"--and I was
not to be informed of the matter unless the move were successful.
Of course it failed. One of the Curators (who are the delegates
and servants of Convocation) was mortally offended by my letter
to "The Academy," and showed the normal smallness of the official
mind by opposing me simply because I told the truth concerning
the laches of his "learned body."

Meanwhile I had addressed the following note to the Most
Honourable the Chancellor of the University.[FN#422]

23, DORSET STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE,
November 30th, 1886.

"MY LORD,

"I deeply regret that the peculiar proceedings of the Bodleian
Library, Oxford, necessitate a reference to a higher authority
with the view of eliciting some explanation.

"The correspondence which has passed between the Curators of the
Bodleian Library and myself will be found in the accompanying
printed paper.

"Here it may be noticed that the Committee of the Orientalist
Congress, Vienna, is preparing to memorialise H.M.'s Secretary of
State, praying that Parliament will empower the British Museum to
lend out Oriental MSS. under proper guarantees. The same measure
had been proposed at the Leyden Congress of 1883; and thus an
extension, rather than a contraction of the loan-system has found
favour with European savants.[FN#423]

"I believe, my Lord, that a new statute upon the subject of the
Bodleian loans of books and MSS. is confessedly required, and
that it awaits only the initiative of the Chancellor of the
University, without whose approval it cannot be passed.

I have, &c.,
(Signed) RICHARD F. BURTON."

"THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE CHANCELLOR."

My object being only publicity I was not disappointed by the
following reply:--

HATFIELD HOUSE, HATFIELD, HERTS,
December 1st, 1886.

"DEAR SIR RICHARD,

"I beg to acknowledge your letter of the 30th of November with
enclosure.

"I have, however, no power over the Bodleian Library, and,
therefore, I am unable to assist you.

Yours, very truly,
(Signed) SALISBURY."

"SIR RICHARD F. BURTON, K.C.M.G."

On January 29, 1887, there was another "Bodleian Meeting," all
the Curators save one being present and showing evident symptoms
of business. The last application on the list of loans entered on
the Agenda paper ran thus:--

V MS. Bodl. Vols. 550-556 to the British Museum (the 7 vols.
successively) for the use of Mr. F. F. Arbuthnot's Agent.

[The MS. lately refused to Sir R. Burton. Mr. Arbuthnot wishes to
have it copied.]

It was at once removed by the Regius Professor of Divinity (Dr.
Ince) and carried nem. con. that, until the whole question of
lending Bodleian books and MSS. then before Council, be
definitely settled, no applications be entertained; and thus
Professor Van Helton, Bernard Kolbach and Mr. Arbuthnot were
doomed, like myself, to be disappointed.

On January 31, 1887, a hebdomadal Council was called to
deliberate about a new lending statute for submission to
Convocation; and an amendment was printed in the "Oxford
University Gazette." It proposed that the Curators by a vote of
two-thirds of their body, and at least six forming a quorum,
might lend books or MSS. to students, whether graduates or not;
subject, when the loans were of special value, to the consent of
Convocation. Presently the matter was discussed in "The Times"
(January 25th; April 28th; and May 31st), which simply re-echoed
the contention of Mr. Chandler's vigorous pamphlets.[FN#424]
Despite the letters of its correspondent "F. M. M." (May 6th,
1887), a "host in himself," who ought to have added the authority
of his name to the sensible measures which he propounded, the
leading journal took a sentimental view of "Bodley's incomparable
library" and strongly advocated its being relegated to
comparative inutility.

On May 31, 1887, an amendment practically forbidding all loans
came before the House. In vain Professor Freeman declared that a
book is not an idol but a tool which must wear out sooner or
later. To no purpose Bodley's Librarian proved that of 460,000
printed volumes in the collection only 460 had been lent out, and
of these only one had been lost. THE AMENDMENT FORBIDDING THE
PRACTICE OF LENDING WAS CARRIED BY 106 VOTES TO 60.

Personally I am not dissatisfied with this proceeding. It is
retrograde legislation befitting the days when books were chained
to the desks. It suffers from a fatal symptom--the weakness of
extreme measures. And the inevitable result in the near future
will be a strong reaction: Convocation will presently be
compelled to adopt some palliation for the evil created by its
own folly.

The next move added meanness to inertness. I do not blame Mr. E.
B. Nicholson, Bodley's Librarian, because he probably had orders
to write the following choice specimen:

30/3/1887.

"DEAR SIR RICHARD BURTON,

"I have received two vols. of four (read six) 'Supplemental
Nights' with a subscription form. If a Bodleian MS. is to be
copied for any volume, I must stipulate that that volume be
supplied to us gratis. Either my leave or that of the Curators is
required for the purpose of copying for publication, and I have
no doubt that they would make the same stipulation. I feel sure
you would in any case not propose to charge us for such a volume,
but until I hear from you I am in a difficulty as to how to reply
to the subscription form I have received.

Yours faithfully,
(Signed) E. B. NICHOLSON,
Librarian."

The able and energetic papers, two printed and one published by
Mr. H. W. Chandler, of Pembroke College, Oxford, clearly prove
the following facts:--

1. That on June 20, 1610, a Bodleian Statute peremptorily forbade
any books or manuscripts being taken out of the Library.

2. That, despite the peremptory and categorical forbiddance by
Bodley, Selden, and others, of lending Bodleian books and MSS.,
loans of both have for upwards of two centuries formed a
precedent.

3. That Bodley's Statute (June 20th, An. 1610) was formally and
officially abrogated by Convocation on May 22nd, 1856;
Convocation retaining the right to lend.

4. That a "privileged list" of (113) borrowers presently arose
and is spoken of as a normal practice:--sicut mos fuit, says the
Statute (Tit. xx. iii. § 11) of 1873; and, lastly,

5. That loans of MSS. and printed books have for years been
authorised to approved public libraries.

After these premises I proceed to notice other points bearing
upon the subject which, curious to say, are utterly neglected or
rather ignored by Mr. Chandler and "The Times." Sir Thomas Bodley
never would have condemned students to study in the Bodleian had
he known the peines fortes et dures to which in these days they
are thereby doomed. "So picturesque and so peculiar is its
construction," says a writer, "that it ensures the maximum of
inefficiency and discomfort." The whole building is a model of
what a library ought not to be. It is at once over solid and
ricketty: room for the storage of books is wanted, and its wooden
staircases, like touchwood or tinder, give one the shudders to
think of fire. True, matches and naked lights are forbidden in
the building; but all know how these prohibitions are regarded by
the public, and it is dreadful to think of what might result from
a lucifer dropped at dark upon the time-rotten planks. The
reading public in the XIXth century must content itself with
boxes or stalls, like those of an old-fashioned tavern or
coffee-house of the humbler sort wherein two readers can hardly
find room for sitting back to back. The atmosphere is unpleasant
and these mean little cribs, often unduly crowded, are so dark
that after the 1st October the reading-room must be closed at 3
p.m. What a contrast are the treasures in the Bodleian with their
mean and miserable surroundings and the way in which the public
is allowed to enjoy them. The whole establishment calls urgently
for reform. Accommodation for the books is wanted; floor and
walls will hardly bear the weight which grows every year at an
alarming ratio--witness the Novel-room. The model Bodleian would
be a building detached and isolated, the better to guard its
priceless contents, and containing at least double the area of
the present old and obsolete Bibliotheca. An establishment of the
kind was proposed in 1857; but unfortunately, the united wisdom
of the University preferred new "Examination Schools" for which
the old half-ruinous pile would have been sufficiently well
fitted. The "Schools," however, were for the benefit of the
examiners; ergo the scandalous sum of £100,000 (some double the
amount) was wasted upon the well-nigh useless Gothic humbug in
High Street, and thus no money was left for the prime want of the
city. After some experience of public libraries and reading-rooms
on the Continent of Europe I feel justified in asserting that the
Bodleian in its present condition is a disgrace to Oxford; indeed
a dishonour to letters in England.

The Bodleian has a succursale, the Radcliffe, which represents
simply a step from bad to worse. The building was intended for an
especial purpose, the storage of books, not for a salle de
lecture. Hence the so-called "Camera" is a most odious
institution, a Purgatory to readers. It is damp in the wet season
from October to May; stuffy during the summer heats and a cave of
Eolus in windy weather: few students except the youngest and
strongest, can support its changeable and nerve-depressing
atmosphere. Consequently the Camera is frequented mainly by the
townsfolk, a motley crew who there study their novels and
almanacs and shamefully misuse the books.[FN#425] In this
building lights, forbidden by the Bodleian, are allowed; it opens
at 10 a.m. and closes at 10 p.m.. and the sooner it reverts to
its original office of a book-depôt the better.

But the Bodleian-Radcliffe concern is typical of the town and, if
that call for reform, so emphatically does

          "Oxford, that scarce deserves the name of land."

From my childhood I had heard endless tirades and much of what is
now called "blowing" about this ancient city, and my youth
(1840-42) suffered not a little disappointment. The old place,
still mostly resembling an overgrown monastery-village, lies in
the valley of the Upper Thames, a meadowland drained by two
ditches; the bigger or Ise, classically called the Isis, and the
lesser the Charwell. This bottom is surrounded by high and
healthy uplands, not as the guide-books say "low scarce-swelling
hills that softly gird the old town;" and these keep off the
winds and make the riverine valley, with its swamped meads and
water-meadows, more fenny and feverish even than Cambridge. The
heights and woods bring on a mild deluge between October 1st and
May 1st; the climate is rainy as that of Shap in Westmoreland
(our old home) and, as at Fernando Po and Singapore, the rain it
raineth more or less every day during one half of the year. The
place was chosen by the ancient Britons for facility of water
transport, but men no longer travel by the Thames and they have
naturally neglected the older road. Throughout England, indeed a
great national work remains to be done. Not a river, not a
rivulet, but what requires cleaning out and systematic excavation
by élevateurs and other appliances of the Suez Canal. The
channels filled up by alluvium and choked by the American weed,
are now raised so high that the beds can no longer act as drains:
at Oxford for instance the beautiful meadows of Christ Church are
little better than swamps and marshes, the fittest homes for
Tergiana, Ouartana and all the fell sisterhood: a blue fog broods
over the pleasant site almost every evening, and a thrust with
the umbrella opens up water. This is the more inexcusable as the
remedy would be easy and by no means costly: the river-mud, if
the ignorant peasants only knew the fact, forms the best of
manures; and this, instead of being deposited in spoil-heaps on
the banks for the rain to wash back at the first opportunity,
should be carried by tram-rails temporarily laid down and be
spread over the distant fields, thus almost paying for the dredge
works. Of course difficulties will arise: the management of the
Thames is under various local "Boards," and each wooden head is
able and aye ready to show its independence and ill temper at the
sacrifice of public interests to private fads.

Hence the climate of Oxford is detestable. Strong undergraduates
cannot withstand its nervous depression and the sleeplessness
arising from damp air charged with marsh gases and bacteria. All
students take time to become acclimatized here, and some are
never acclimatized at all. And no wonder, when the place is
drained by a fetid sewer of greenish yellow hue containing per
10,000, 245 parts of sewage. The only tolerable portion of the
year is the Long Vacation, when the youths in mortar-boards all
vanish from the view, while many of the oldsters congregate in
the reformed convents called Colleges.

Climate and the resolute neglect of sanitation are probably the
chief causes why Oxford never yet produced a world-famous and
epoch-making man, while Cambridge can boast of Newton and Darwin.
The harlequin city of domes and spires, cribs and slums shows
that curious concurrence of opposites so common in England. The
boasted High Street is emblematical of the place, where moral as
well as material extremes meet and are fain to dwell side by
side. It is a fine thoroughfare branching off into mere lanes,
neither these nor that apparently ever cleaned. The huge
buildings of scaling, mouldering stone are venerable-looking
piles which contrast sadly with the gabled cottages of crepi,
hurlin, or wattle and dab; and the brand-new store with its
plate-glass windows hustles the old-fashioned lollipop-shop. As
regards minor matters there are new market passages but no Public
Baths; and on Sundays, the stands are destitute of cabs, although
with that queer concession to democracy which essentially belongs
to the meaner spirited sort of Conservatism, "'busses" are
allowed to ply after 2 p.m., when the thunder of bells somewhat
abates.

Old "Alma Mater," who to me has ever been a "durissima noverca,"
dubs herself "University;" and not a few of her hopefuls entre
faiblesse et folie, still entitle themselves "University men."
The title once belonged to Oxford but now appertains to it no
more. Compare with it the model universities of Berlin, Paris and
Vienna, where the lists of lecturers bear the weightiest names in
the land. Oxford is but a congeries of twenty-one colleges and
five halls or hostels, each educating its pupils (more or less)
with an especial eye to tutors' fees and other benefices, the
vested rights of the "Dons." Thus all do their best to prevent
the scholars availing themselves of University, as opposed to
Collegiate, lectures; and thus they can stultify a list of some
sixty-six professors. This boarding-school system is simply a
dishonest obstacle to students learning anything which may be of
use to them in after-life, such as modern and Oriental languages,
chemistry, anthropology and the other -ologies. Here in fact men
rarely progress beyond the Trivium and the Quadrivium of the Dark
Ages, and tuition is a fine study of the Res scibilis as
understood by the Admirable Crichton and other worthies, circa
A.D. 1500. The students of Queen Elizabeth's day would here--and
here only--find themselves in congenial company. Worse still,
Oxford is no longer a "Seat of learning" or a "House of the
Muses," nor can learned men be produced under the present system.
The place has become a collection of finishing schools, in fact
little better than a huge board for the examination of big boys
and girls.

Oxford and her education are thoroughly disappointing; but the
sorest point therein is that this sham University satisfies the
hapless Public, which knows nothing about its fainéance. It is a
mere stumbling-block in the way of Progress especially barring
the road to one of the main wants of English Education, a great
London University which should not be ashamed to stand by Berlin,
Paris and Vienna.

Had the good knight and "Pious Founder," Sir Thomas Bodley, who
established his library upon the ruins of the University
Bibliotheca wrecked by the "Reformation," been able to foresee
the condition of Oxford and her libraries--Bodleian and
Radcliffean--in this latter section of the XIXth century, he
would hardly, I should hope, have condemned English students and
Continental scholars to compulsory residence and labour in places
so akin to the purgatorial.




                          Appendix B.



   THE THREE UNTRANSLATED TALES IN MR. E. J. W. GIBB'S "FORTY
                            VEZIRS."




                THE THIRTY-EIGHTH VEZIR'S STORY.
             (Page 353 of Mr. Gibb's translation.)



There was in the city of Cairo a merchant, and one day he bought
a slave-girl, and took her to his house. There was in his house
an ape; this the merchant fetched and dragged up to the
slave-girl. He said, "Yield thyself over to this, and I will set
thee free." The slave-girl did so of necessity, and she conceived
by him. When her time was come she bare a son all of whose
members were shaped like those of a man, save that he had a tail
like an ape. The merchant and the slave-girl occupied themselves
bringing up this son. One day, when the son was five or six
months old, the merchant filled a large cauldron with milk, and
lighted a great fire under it. When it was boiling, he seized the
son and cast him into the cauldron; and the girl began to lament.
The merchant said, "Be silent, make no lamentation; go and be
free;" and he gave her some sequins. Then he turned, and the
cauldron had boiled so that not even any bones were left. The
merchant took down the cauldron, and placed seven strainers, one
above the other; and he took the scum that had gathered on the
liquid in the cauldron and filtered it through the seven
strainers, and he took that which was in the last and put it into
a bottle. And the slave-girl bare in her heart bitter hatred
against the merchant, and she said in herself, "Even as thou hast
burned my liver will I burn thee;" and she began to watch her
opportunity. (One day) the merchant said to her, "Make ready some
food," and went out. So the girl cooked the food, and she mixed
some of that poison in the dish. When the merchant returned she
brought the tray and laid it down, and then withdrew into a
corner. The merchant took a spoonful of that food, and as soon as
he put it into his mouth, he knew it to be the poison, and he
cast the spoon that was in his hand at the girl. A piece, of the
bigness of a pea, of that poisoned food fell from the spoon on
the girl's hand, and it made the place where it fell black. As
for the merchant, he turned all black, and swelled till he became
like a blown-out skin, and he died. But the slave-girl medicined
herself and became well; and she kept what remained of the poison
and sold it to those who asked for it.




                  THE FORTIETH VEZIR'S STORY.
             (Page 366 in Mr. Gibb's translation.)



There was of old time a tailor, and he had a fair wife. One day
this woman sent her slave-girl to the carder's to get some cotton
teased. The slave-girl went to the carder's shop and gave him
cotton for a gown to get teased. The carder while teasing the
cotton displayed his yard to the slave-girl. She blushed and
passed to his other side. As she thus turned round the carder
displayed his yard on that side also. Thus the slave-girl saw it
on that side too. And she went and said to her mistress, "Yon
carder, to whom I went, has two yards." The lady said to her, "Go
and say to yon carder, 'My mistress wishes thee; come at night.'"
So the slave-girl went and said this to the carder. As soon as it
was night the carder went to that place and waited. The woman
went out and met the carder and said, "Come and have to do with
me while I am lying by my husband." When it was midnight the
carder came and waked the woman. The woman lay conveniently and
the carder fell to work. She felt that the yard which entered her
was but one, and said, "Ah my soul, carder, at it with both of
them." While she was softly speaking her husband awaked and
asked, "What means thy saying, 'At it with both of them?'" He
stretched out his hand to his wife's kaze and the carder's yard
came into it. The carder drew himself back and his yard slipped
out of the fellow's hand, and he made shift to get away. The
fellow said, "Out on thee, wife, what meant that saying of thine,
'At it with both of them?'" The woman said, "O husband, I saw in
my dream that thou wast fallen into the sea and wast swimming
with one hand and crying out, 'Help! I am drowning!' I shouted to
thee from the shore, 'At it with both of them,' and thou
begannest to swim with both thy hands." Then the husband said,
"Wife, I too know that I was in the sea, from this that a wet
fish came into my hand and then slipped out and escaped; thou
speakest truly." And he loved his wife more than before.




                THE LADY'S THIRTY-FOURTH STORY.
                  (From the India Office MS.)
             (Page 399 in Mr. Gibb's translation.)



They tell that there was a Khoja and he had an exceeding fair
son, who was so beautiful that he who looked upon him was
confounded. This Khoja watched over his son right carefully; he
let him not come forth from a certain private chamber, and he
left not the ribbon of his trousers unsealed. When the call to
prayer was chanted from the minaret, the boy would ask his father
saying, "Why do they cry out thus?" and the Khoja would answer,
"Someone has been undone and has died, and they are calling out
to bury him." And the boy believed these words. The beauty of
this boy was spoken of in Persia; and a Khoja came from Persia to
Baghdad with his goods and chattels for the love of this boy. And
he struck up a friendship with the boy's father, and ever gave to
him his merchandise at an easy price, and he sought to find out
where his son abode. When the Khoja had discovered that the boy
was kept safe in that private chamber, he one day said to his
father, "I am about to go to a certain place; and I have a chest
whereinto I have put whatsoever I possess of valuables; this I
shall send to thee, and do thou take it and shut it up in that
chamber where thy son is." And the father answered, "Right
gladly." So the Khoja let build a chest so large that he himself
might lie in it, and he put therein wine and all things needful
for a carouse. Then he said to his servant, "Go, fetch a porter
and take this chest to the house of Khoja Such-an-one, and say,
'My master has sent this to remain in your charge,' and leave it
and come away. And again on the morrow go and fetch it, saying,
'My master wishes the chest.'" So the servant went for a porter,
and the Khoja hid himself in the chest. Then the boy laded the
porter with the chest and took it to the other Khoja's house,
where he left it and went away. When it was night the Khoja came
forth from the chest, and he saw a moon-face sleeping in the
bed-clothes, and a candle was burning in a candlestick at his
head; and when the Khoja beheld this he was confounded and
exclaimed, "And blessed be God, the fairest of Creators!"[FN#426]
Then the Khoja laid out the wine and so forth; and he went up
softly and waked the boy. And the boy arose from his place and
addressed himself to speak, saying, "Wherefore hast thou come
here?" Straight-way the Khoja filled a cup and gave it to him,
saying, "Drink this, and then I shall tell thee what manner of
man I am." And he besought the boy and spread out sequins before
him. So the boy took the cup and drank what was in it. When the
Khoja had given him to drink three or four cups the face of the
boy grew tulip-hued, and he became heated with the wine and began
to sport with the Khoja. So all that night till morning did the
Khoja make merry with the boy; and whatsoever his desire was, he
attained thereto. When it was morning, the Khoja again went into
the chest; and the servant came and laded the porter with the
same and took it back to his house. And on the morrow, when the
boy and his father were sitting together, the mu'ezzin chanted
the call to prayer, whereupon the boy exclaimed, "Out on thee,
father; and the boy who is undone dies, and so this fellow goes
up there and bawls out; last night they undid me; how is it that
I am not dead?" Then the father smote the boy on the mouth and
said, "Speak not such words; they are a shame." And then he knew
why the chest had come.







                   Arabian Nights, Volume 14
                           Footnotes



[FN#1]  From the Wortley Montague MS. vol. iii. pp. 80-96. J.
Scott: vol. vi. pp. 1-7. Histoire du Sulthan d'Yemen et de ses
trots fils; Gauttier vol. vi. pp. 158-165.

[FN#2]  The worst disease in human life, now recognised as "Annus
Domini."

[FN#3]  Arab. "Mál wa Ghawál": in Badawi parlance "Mál"
would=flocks and herds (pecunia, pecus); and amongst the
burghers=ready money, coin. Another favourite jingle of similar
import is "Mál wa Nawál."

There is an older form of the Sultan of Al Yaman and his three
sons, to be found in M. Zotenberg's "Chronique de Tabari," vol.
ii. pp. 357-61.

[FN#4]  In the W. M. MS. the sisters are called "Shahrzádeh"
(=City born) and "Dinárzádeh" (=ducat born) and the royal
brothers Shahrbáz (=City player or City falcon) and Kahramán
(vol. i. p. 1) alias Samarbán (ibid.). I shall retain the old
spelling.

[FN#5]  I have hitherto translated "wa adraka (masc.) Shahrázáda
al-Sabáh," as=And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day; but it is
more correct as well as more picturesque to render the phrase
"was surprised (or overtaken) by the dawn."

[FN#6]  Arab. "'Adrán,"=much and heavy rain.

[FN#7]  For "Halwá" see vol. ii. pp. 47-212. Scott (vol. vi. 413)
explains "Hámiz" as "a species of small grain," probably
confounding it with Hummus (or Himmis)=vetches. It is the pop.
term for pickles, "sour meat" as opposed to "sweetmeats." The
Arabs divide the camel's pasture into "Khullah" which means sweet
food called bread and into "Hámiz" termed fruit: the latter is
composed mainly of salsolaceae, and as camels feed upon it during
the hot season it makes them drink. Hence in Al Hariri (Preface)
"I change the pasture," i.e., I pass from grave to gay, from
light to dignified style. (Chenery, p. 274).

[FN#8]  This is the modern version of the tale which the author
of "Zadig" has made familiar to Europe. The hero is brought
before the King and Queen of Babylon for stealing a horse and a
dog; and, when held by the chief "Destour" (priest) to be a
thief, justifies himself. I have given in full the older history
from Tabari, the historian (vixit A.D. 839-923). For the tracker
("Paggí") and the art of tracking see Sind Revisited, i. 180-183.
I must again express my wonder that the rural police of Europe
still disdain the services of trained dogs when these are about
to be introduced into the army.

[FN#9]  Arab. "Bitá'i"=my own. I have already noticed that this
is the Egypt. form and the Nilotes often turn the 'Ayn into an H,
e.g. Bitáht for Bitá'at, e.g. Ash Shabakah bitáht as-Sayd, thy
net for fishing. (Spitta Bey, Contes Arabes Modernes, p. 43.)

[FN#10]  Arab. "Mukabbab;" prop. vaulted, arched, domed in Kubbah
(or cupola)-shape.

[FN#11]  Arab. "Firásah." "Sciences are of three kinds: one the
science of Faith, another the science of Physiognomy (Firásah),
and another the science of the Body; but unless there be the
science of Physiognomy, other science availeth not." So says "The
Forty Vizirs:" Lady's vith story and Vizir's xxxist story. For a
note on "Firásah" see vol. viii. 326.

[FN#12]  Arab. "In lam tazidd Kayni"=lit. unless thou oppose my
forming or composition.

[FN#13]  Arab. "Faráfish," a word which I cannot find in the
dictionary, and so translate according to the context. Dr.
Steingass remarks that the nearest approach to it would be
"Faráfík" (plur. of Furfák)=fine, thin or soft bread.

[FN#14]  See, in the "Turkish Tales" by Petis de la Croix (Weber,
Tales of the East, vol. iii. 196), the History of the Sophi of
Baghdad, where everything returns to (or resembles) its origin.
Thus the Wazir who proposed to cut up a criminal and hang him in
the shambles was the self-convicted son of a butcher; he who
advised boiling him down and giving his flesh to the dogs was the
issue of a cook, and the third who proposed to pardon him was
nobly born. See Night cccxli.

[FN#15]  Arab. "Al-Mafyaat," lit.=a shady place; a locality
whereupon the sun does not rise.

[FN#16]  Arab. "Ja'idiyah," a favourite word in this MS.
"Ja'ad"=a curl, a liberal man: Ja'ad al-yad=miserly, and Abú
ja'dah=father of curls,=a wolf. Scott (passim) translates the
word "Sharper;" Gore Ouseley "Labourer;" and De Sacy
(Chrestomathie ii. 369, who derives it from Ju'd=avoir les
cheveux crépus): in Egypt, homme de la populace, canaille. He
finds it in the Fabrica Linguæ Arab. of Germanus of Silesia (p.
786)=ignavis, hebes, stupidus, esp. a coward. Ibrahim Salamah of
Alexandria makes the term signify in Syria, impudent, thieving,
wicked. Spitta Bey translates this word musicien ambulant in his
Gloss. to Contes Arabes, p. 171. According to Dr. Steingass, who,
with the Muhít al-Muhít, reads "Ju'aydíyah," Ju'ayd is said to be
the P. N. of an Egyptian clown, who, with bell-hung cap and
tambourine in hand, wandered about the streets singing laudatory
doggrel and pestering the folk for money. Many vagabonds who
adopted this calling were named after him and the word was
generalised in that sense.

[FN#17] MS. vol. iii. pp. 96-121. Scott, "Story of the Three
Sharpers and the Sultan," pp. 7-17; Gauttier, Histoire des trois
filous et d'un Sulthan, vi. 165-176. 

[FN#18] Arab. Yasrahú=roaming, especially at early dawn; hence
the wolf is called "Sirhán," and Yaklishu (if I read it aright)
is from Kulsh, and equivalent to "kicking" (their heels). 

[FN#19] Nusf=half a dirham, drachma or franc, see ii. 37; vi.
214, etc. 

[FN#20] Bast, a preparation of Bhang (Cannabis Sativa), known in
Egypt but not elsewhere: see Lane, M. E., chapt. xv. Here it is
made synonymous with "Hashísh"=Bhang in general. 

[FN#21] Ghaushah, a Persianism for which "Ghaughá" is a more
common form. "Ghaush" is a tree of hard wood whereof musical
instruments were made; hence the mod. words "Ghásha" and
"Ghawwasha"=he produced a sound, and "Ghaushah"=tumult, quarrel.
According to Dr. Steingass, the synon. in the native dicts. are
"Khisám," "Lag-hat," "Jalabah," etc. 

[FN#22] Said ironicè, the jeweller being held to be one of the
dishonest classes, like the washerman, the water-carrier, the
gardener, etc. In England we may find his representative in the
"silversmith," who will ask a pound sterling for a bit of metal
which cost him perhaps five shillings or even less, and who hates
to be bought by weight. The Arab. has "Jauhar-ji," a Turkish form
for Jauhari; and here "jauhar" apparently means a pearl, the
stone once peculiar to royalty in Persia, but the kind of gem is
left undetermined. 

[FN#23] Arab. "Sáza, yasízu," not a dictionary word. Perhaps it
is a clerical error for "S sa," he groomed or broke in a horse,
hence understood all about horses. 

[FN#24] In the orig. "Shorbah," Pers.=a mess of pottage: I have
altered it for reasons which will presently appear. 

[FN#25] Arab. "Ghabasah," from Ghabas=obscure, dust-coloured. 

[FN#26] Arab. "Súsah"=a weevil, a moth, a worm. It does not mean
simply a flaw, but a live animal (like our toads in the rock);
and in the popular version of the tale the lapidary discovers its
presence by the stone warming in his hand. 

[FN#27] Arab. "Mashá'íli" the cresset-bearer who acted hangman:
see vol. i. 259, etc. 

[FN#28] Arab. "Ta'kíl," tying up a camel's foreleg above the
knee; the primary meaning of Akl, which has so many secondary
significations. 

[FN#29] Arab. "Suwán," lit.=rock, syenite, hard stone, flint;
here a marteau de guerre. 

[FN#30] Arab. "Hálik"=intensely black, so as to look blue under a
certain angle of light. 

[FN#31] Arab. "Rikáb" (=stirrup) + "dár" Pers. (=holder). 

[FN#32] I have ransacked dictionaries and vocabularies but the
word is a mere blank. 

[FN#33] Arab. "Jámúsah." These mules are believed in by the
Arabs. Shaw and other travellers mention the Mauritanian
"Jumart," the breed between a bull and a mare (or jennyass) or an
ass and a cow. Buffon disbelieved in the mongrel, holding it to
be a mere bardeau, got by a stallion horse out of an ass.
Voltaire writes "Jumarre" after German fashion and Littré derives
it from jument + art (finale péjorative), or the Languedoc
"Gimere" which according to Diez suggests "Chimæra." Even in
London not many years ago a mule was exhibited as the issue of a
horse and a stag. No Indian ever allows his colt to drink
buffalo's milk, the idea being that a horse so fed will lie down
in instead of fording or swimming a stream. 

[FN#34] See Sindbad the Seaman, vol. vi. 9. 

[FN#35] Arab. "Mubattat" from batt=a duck: in Persia the
Batt-i-May is a wine-glass shaped like the duck. Scott (vi. 12)
translates "thick and longish." 

[FN#36] Arab. "his Harím"; see vol. i. 165; iv. 126. VOL. XIV. 

[FN#37] Again "he" for she. See vol. ii. 179. 

[FN#38] Arab. "Gháziyah": for the plur. "Ghawázi" see vol. i.
214; also Lane (M.E.) index under "Ghazeeyehs." 

[FN#39] The figure prothesis without apodosis. Understand "will
slay thee": see vol. vi. 203. 

[FN#40] Because the girl had not been a professional dancer, i.e
a public prostitute. 

[FN#41] Arab. "Amán"=quarter, mercy: see vol. i. 342. 

[FN#42] For the "Mandíl" of mercy see vol. i. 343; for that of
dismissal x. 47 and Ibn Khall. iv. 211. In Spitta Bey's "Contes
Arabes" (p. 223), I find throwing the kerchief (tarammá al
mahramah) used in the old form of choosing a mate. In the Tale of
the Sultan of AlYaman and his three Sons (Supplem. Nights, vol.
iv.) the Princesses drop their kerchiefs upon the head of the
Prince who had saved them, by way of pointing him out. 

[FN#43] Arab. "Sattár:" see vols. i. 258 and iii. 41. 

[FN#44] In the text "Arghá" for "Arkhá"=he "brayed" (like an
ostrich, etc.) for "his limbs relaxed." It reminds one of the
German missionary's fond address to his flock, "My prethren, let
us bray!" 

[FN#45] Arab. "Azbad," from Zbd (Zabd)=foaming, frothing, etc.,
whence "Zubaydah," etc. 

[FN#46] Arab. "Zabh" (Zbh)=the ceremonial killing of animals for
food: see vols. v. 391; viii. 44. I may note, as a proof of how
modern is the civilisation of Europe that the domestic fowl was
unknown to Europe till about the time of Pericles (ob. B.C. 429). 

[FN#47] See in "The Forty Vizirs" (Lady's ivth Tale) how Khizr
tells the King the origin of his Ministers from the several
punishments which they propose for the poor man. I have noticed
this before in Night cccxxxiii. Boethius, translated by Chaucer,
explains the underlying idea, "All thynges seken ayen to hir
propre course and all thynges rejoysen in hir returninge agayne
to hir nature." 

[FN#48] For the Taylasán hood see vol. iv. 286. 

[FN#49] The "Kalansuwah"-cap is noted by Lane (A. N. chapt. iii.
22) as "Kalensuweh." In M. E. (Supplement i. "The Copts") he
alters the word to Kalás'weh and describes it as a strip of
woollen stuff, of a deep blue or black colour, about four inches
wide, attached beneath the turban and hanging down the back to
the length of about a foot. It is the distinguishing mark of the
Coptic regular clergy.

[FN#50] W. M. MS. vol. iii. pp. 121-141. Scott, "The Adventures
of the abdicated Sultan," pp. 18-19; including the "History of
Mahummud, Sultan of Cairo," pp. 20-30. 

[FN#51] "Káhirah." I repeat my belief (Pilgrimage i. 171) that
"Káhirah," whence our "Cairo" through the Italian corruption,
means not la victorieuse (Mediant al-Káhirah) as D'Herbelot has
it; but City of Kahir or Mars the planet. It was so called
because as Richardson informed the world (sub voce) it was
founded in A.H. 358 (=A.D. 968) when the warlike planet was in
the ascendant by the famous General Jauhar a Dalmatian renegade
(not a "Greek slave") for the first of the Fatimite dynasty
Al-Mu'izz li 'l-dini 'lláh. 

[FN#52] According to Caussin de Perceval (père) in his
translation of the "Contes Arabes," there are four wonders in the
Moslem world: (1) the Pharos of Alexandria; (2) the Bridge of
Sanjia in Northern Syria; (3) The Church of Rohab (Edessa); and
(4) the Amawi Mosque of Damascus. 

[FN#53] Arab. "Faddah," lit.=silver, because made of copper
alloyed with nobler metal; the smallest Egyptian coin=Nuss (i.e.
Nusf, or half a dirham) and the Turk. paráh. It is the fortieth
of the piastre and may be assumed at the value of a
quarter-farthing. 

[FN#54] This word, in Egypt. "Harág," is the cry with which the
Dallál (broker) announces each sum bidden at an auction. 

[FN#55] The Portuguese Xerafim: Supplemental Nights, vol. iii.
166. 

[FN#56] A Khan or caravanserai: see vol. i. 266 and Pilgrimage i.
60. 

[FN#57] Arab. "Hilm" (vision) "au 'Ilm" (knowledge) a phrase
peculiar to this MS. 

[FN#58] The careless scribe forgets that the Sultan is speaking
and here drops into the third person. This "Enallage of persons"
is, however, Koranic and therefore classical: Arab critics aver
that in such cases the "Hikáyah" (=literal reproduction of a
discourse, etc.) passes into an "Ikhbár"=mere account of the same
discourse). See Al Mas'údi iii. 216. I dare not reproduce this
figure in English. 

[FN#50] Arab. "Auzah," the Pers. Oták and the Turk. Otah (vulg.
"Oda" whence "Odalisque"), a popular word in Egypt and Syria. 

[FN#60] Arab. "Al Afandiyah" showing the late date or reduction
of the tale. The Turkish word derives from the Romaic Afentis
({Greek}) the corrupted O.G.{Greek}=an absolute commander, and
"authentie." The word should not be written as usual "Effendi,"
but "Efendi," as Prof. Galland has been careful to do. 

[FN#61] Arab. "Al-dakhlah"; repeatedly referred to in The Nights.
The adventure is a replica of that in "Abu Mohammed highs
Lazybones," vol. iv., pp. 171-174. 

[FN#62] Usual in the East, not in England, where some mothers are
idiots enough not to tell their daughters what to expect on the
wedding night. Hence too often unpleasant surprises, disgust and
dislike. The most modern form is that of the chloroform'd bride
upon whose pillow the bridegroom found a paper pinned and
containing the words, "Mamma says you're to do what you like." 

[FN#63] Arab. "Akhaztu dam wajhhi há." 

[FN#64] Arab. "Dilk" more commonly "Khirkah," the tattered and
pieced robe of a religious mendicant. 

[FN#65] Arab. "Darbálah." Scott (p. 24) must have read
"Gharbálah" when he translated "A turban full of holes as a
sieve." In classical Arabic the word is written "Darbalah," and
seems to correspond with the Egyptian "Darábukkah," a tabor of
wood or earthenware figured by Lane (M.E. chapt. xviii.). It is,
like the bowl, part of the regular Darwaysh's begging gear. 

[FN#66] Vulg. Maghribi. For this word see the story of Alaeddin,
Supplem., vol. iii. 31. According to Heron, "History of
Maugraby," the people of Provence, Languedoc and Gascony use
Maugraby as a term of cursing: Maugrebleu being used in other
parts of France. 

[FN#67] In text "Fanárát"; the Arab. plur. of the Pers. "Fanár"=a
light-house, and here equiv. to the Mod. Gr. {Greek}, a lantern,
the Egypt. "Fánús." 

[FN#68] This Sultan of the Jann preceded by sweepers,
flag-bearers and tent-pitchers always appears in the form of
second-sight called by Egyptians "Darb al Mandal"=striking the
magic circle in which the enchanter sits when he conjures up
spirits. Lane (M. E. chapt. xii.) first made the "Cairo Magician"
famous in Europe, but Herklots and others had described a cognate
practice in India many years before him. 

[FN#69] Arab, "Jáwúsh" for Cháwush (vulg. Chiaush) Turk.=an army
serjeant, a herald or serjeant at arms; an apparitor or officer
of the Court of Chancery (not a "Mace-bearer or Messenger,"
Scott). See vol. vii. 327. 

[FN#70] Arab. from Persian "Bímáristán," a "sick-house,"
hospital, a mad-house: see vol. i. 288. 

[FN#71] The text says only that "he was reading:" sub. the Holy
Volume.

[FN#72] MS. vol. iii., pp. 142-168. Scott, "Story of the First
Lunatic," pp. 31 44. Gauttier, Histoire du Premier Fou, vol. vi.
187. It is identical with No. ii. of Chavis and Cazotte,
translated by C. de Perceval, Le Bimaristan (i.e. the Hospital),
ou Histoire du jeune Marchand de Bagdad et de la Dame inconnue
(vol. viii. pp. 179-180). Heron terms it the "Story of Halechalbe
(Ali Chelebi?) and the Unknown Lady," and the narrative is
provided with a host of insipid and incorrect details, such as "A
gentleman enjoying his pipe." The motif of this tale is common in
Arab. folk lore, and it first appears in the "Tale of Azíz and
Azízah," ii. 328. A third variant will occur further on. 

[FN#73] Spelt in vol. iii. 143 and elsewhere, "Khwájá" for
"Khwájah." 

[FN#74] Arab. "Hubban li-raasik,"=out of love for thy head, i.e.
from affection for thee. Dr. Steingass finds it analogous with
the Koranic "Hubban li 'llahi" (ii. 160), where it is joined with
"Ashaddu"=stronger, as regards love to or for Allah, more Allah
loving. But it can stand adverbially by itself=out of love for
Allah, for Allah's sake. 

[FN#75] Arab. "Zahr," lit. and generically a blossom; but often
used in a specific sense throughout The Nights. 

[FN#76] Arab. "Kursi" here=a square wooden seat without back and
used for sitting cross-legged. See Suppl. vol. i. 9. 

[FN#77] Arab. "Sujjádah"=lit. a praying carpet, which Lane calls
"Seggádeh." 

[FN#78] Arab. "Wakíl," lit.=agent: here the woman's
representative, corresponding roughly with the man who gives away
the bride amongst ourselves. 

[FN#79] The mention of coffee and sherbet, here and in the next
page, makes the tale synchronous with that of Ma'arúf or the
xviith. century. 

[FN#80] The MS. writes "Zardakát" for "Zardakhán": see below. 

[FN#81] Scott (p. 36) has "mahazzim (for maházim), al Zerdukkaut
(for al-Zardakhán)" and "munnaskif (for manáshif) al fillfillee."
Of the former he notes (p. 414) "What this composition is I
cannot define: it may be translated compound of saffron, yoke of
egg or of yellowish drugs." He evidently confounds it with the
Pers. Zard-i-Kháyah=yoke of egg. Of the second he says "compound
of peppers, red, white and black." Lane (The Nights, vol. i. p.
8) is somewhat scandalised at such misrepresentation, translating
the first "apron-napkins of thick silk," and the second "drying
